The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ , the son of David , the son of Abraham . ||| Puk di de e rhorat targa Yesus Kristus upni-tgarni kotni-nanni . Yesus de , Daud di'nani-lohorni duratni-waitni me Abraham kotnu-turnu gerni-wniaunu duratni-waitni upni-a'nani .
Abraham became the father of Isaac . Isaac became the father of Jacob . Jacob became the father of Judah and his brothers . ||| Abraham na ' a'na nana Isaka , Isaka na ' a'na Yakopa , Yakop na ' a'na nana Yehuda nora amni-hyalli ,
Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar . Perez became the father of Hezron . Hezron became the father of Ram . ||| Yehuda nora Tamara ranina pede ra ' a'n nana Peres me Serah . Peres na ' a'na nana Hesron Hesron na ' a'na Rama .
Ram became the father of Amminadab . Amminadab became the father of Nahshon . Nahshon became the father of Salmon . ||| Ram na ' a'na nana Aminadaba , Aminadab na ' a'n nana Nahasona , Nahason na ' a'na Salmona ,
Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab . Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth . Obed became the father of Jesse . ||| Salmon nora Rahab rmehlima pede ra ' a'na Boas , Boas nora Rut ra ' a'n nana Obed . Obed na ' a'na Isai ,
Jesse became the father of King David . David the king became the father of Solomon by her who had been Uriah 's wife . ||| ne Isai na ' a'n nana ray Daud . Daud na'ala Uria hawni pa nora rmehlim pa ra ' a'na Salomo .
Solomon became the father of Rehoboam . Rehoboam became the father of Abijah . Abijah became the father of Asa . ||| Salomo na ' a'n nana Rehabeama , Rehabeam na ' a'na Abia , Abia na ' a'n nana Asa ,
Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat . Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram . Joram became the father of Uzziah . ||| Asa na ' a'n nana Yosafata , Yosafat na ' a'na Yorama , Yoram na ' a'na Usia ,
Uzziah became the father of Jotham . Jotham became the father of Ahaz . Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah . ||| Usia na ' a'n nan Yotama , Yotam na ' a'na Ahasa , Ahas na ' a'n nan Hiskia ,
Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh . Manasseh became the father of Amon . Amon became the father of Josiah . ||| Hiskia na ' a'na Manasye , Manasye na ' a'na Amona , Amon na ' a'na Yosia ,
Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers at the time of the exile to Babylon . ||| Yosia na ' a'na Yekonya na'itra amni-hyalli demade rhopliala ' Babel .
After the exile to Babylon , Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel . Shealtiel became the father of Zerubbabel . ||| La ' a lerni la rhoplia Israel mutnu rella Babel de , Yekonya na ' a'n nana Sealtiela . Dewade Sealtiel na ' a'n nan Serubabel ,
Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud . Abiud became the father of Eliakim . Eliakim became the father of Azor . ||| Serubabel na ' a'na Abihud , Abihud na ' a'n nan Elyakima , Elyakim na ' a'na Asura ,
Azor became the father of Zadok . Zadok became the father of Achim . Achim became the father of Eliud . ||| Asur na ' a'na Sedok , Sedok na ' a'n nan Akima , Akim na ' a'na Eliuda ,
Eliud became the father of Eleazar . Eleazar became the father of Matthan . Matthan became the father of Jacob . ||| Eliud na ' a'na Eliasara , Eliasar na ' a'n nan Matana . Matan na ' a'na Yakopa ,
Jacob became the father of Joseph , the husband of Mary , from whom was born Jesus , who is called Christ . ||| Yakopa na ' a'na Yusup . Noka Yusup nor Maria rmehlima . Maria ed mak kayor niana Yesus , maka ha rwet la de , Ray maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori .
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations , from David to the exile to Babylon fourteen generations , and from the carrying away to Babylon to the Christ , fourteen generations . ||| Pede la Abrahama pa nma ntut tiar lia Daud , de tuwu nernu-nha ' nana re'eni termida wehrani wogata . La'pa nwatiawua Daud pa la nte'ela Israel mutnu maka ha rhopliala ' Babel , de tuwu termida wehrani wogat wali . Ne la ' a lerni la ha rhopliala mutu Israel la ' a Babel pa nmai wia la ' a ler maka ha rmoria Yesus maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori die mana , tuwu termida wehrani wogat wali .
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was like this , After his mother , Mary , was engaged to Joseph , before they came together , she was found pregnant by the Holy Spirit . ||| Emkadille la ' a maka ha rayoria Yesus Kristus . De la'pa inni Maria nora Yusup ra'an lira-remun waw pa hota rmehlim pa , mere edonna rawok ma'ta la yaninni pa emeka muanke ' id nor hawni , dewade Maria na'apun wa onnila Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak kodi plolli .
Joseph , her husband , being a righteous man , and not willing to make her a public example , intended to put her away secretly . ||| Yusup mak kora Maria kanyah ' a de , de riy ida maka ralamni kaplele'era . La ' hade pede la'pa Yusup nat niohora Maria na'apnu mere e a'nani atia ' hade dewade Yusup niwra nahmen doinia niah'ani Maria mere niwa nhi ' a mtiel nekpa totpena yana nhi ' amola-ma ' a Maria la ' a riy rahu gaini ralamni .
But when he thought about these things , behold , an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream , saying , Joseph , son of David , do n't be afraid to take to yourself Mary as your wife , for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit . ||| La'pa Yusup ntepartar mua'ta la wniarora-wnialai la ' hade , dewade nanina noma nmi ' nana emkadi , Nmi ' nande Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni ida nma nakot la niwra , Yusup ee , Daud duratni-waitni id o ' a . Yana mumta'ata muora Maria mmiehlima . Yoma papay mak kden la Maria apannu de , de Uplerlawna Nhiwni mak kodi plolli pa Nhi ' nan hade .
She shall give birth to a son . You shall name him Jesus , for it is he who shall save his people from their sins . ||| Hota Maria nayor niana a'n muanke ' a ida . Ne hota o ' ed mak kala papay die pa nwawa Yesus nnia'eratni de Itmatromlawanni makamori-kalewna . Yoma hota E ' ed mak kamori-kalewan nana E mutnu-rahanu la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni .
Now all this has happened that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet , saying , ||| Hare honona re rtutu-rte'ewa , totpena naplol la ' a hya ' ed maka Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni ha nakota de pa makwohorulu-ktatrulu re rakot ulg oleka mai ita riwra ,
Behold , the virgin shall be with child , and shall give birth to a son . They shall call his name Immanuel , which is , being interpreted , God with us . ||| Hota pat hararara mak edon nor wut mua'ta muanke ' a ranin wutu na'apun pa nayor niana a'na muanke ' a ida de hota rala pa nwawa Imanuel maka la ' a yawal Ibrani de nnia'eratni de , Uplerlawna Nor it talla .
Joseph arose from his sleep , and did as the angel of the Lord commanded him , and took his wife to himself , ||| La'pa Yusup namat wa noma nlernohora hya ' ed maka Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni nakot la e ' a . De hota nora Maria rmehlim pa .
and did n't know her sexually until she had given birth to her firstborn son . He named him Jesus . ||| Mere Yusup edon nor eti Maria pa ranin wut lia ' lera Maria na'apun pa edonna nayor mia'ta . Ne la'pa Maria nayoria papay die dewade Yusup nweta la Yesus .
Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of King Herod , behold , wise men from the east came to Jerusalem , saying , ||| Maria nmor tiarga Yesus la ' leta Betlehem la ' a Yudea nohananni-taniaratni la ' lera ray Herodes nodi plolli pa nkukmu-nto'ma . La ' ler de , de maka kwata'wa nohora wtiona lyanti lipni-laini rwatiawua tipur pa rmai lia Yerusalem .
Where is he who is born King of the Jews ? For we saw his star in the east , and have come to worship him . ||| Rmai die ratiantian lola riwra , Ee , keke'enku ' a maka na'nama rmor niana totpena nla ' a ray lia riy Yahudi re , etla hanmeni ? Amamkek nan oleka wtionni la ' a walli tipru pede ammai totpena amhu'ru-mhelam la gaini ralamni .
When King Herod heard it , he was troubled , and all Jerusalem with him . ||| La'pa ray Herodes natlin nana lir de dewade nhedum pa namta'at wenna , me riy honona mak kden la Yerusalem emkade wali .
Gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people , he asked them where the Christ would be born . ||| La'pa Herodes npolg awok imam-imam re o'tani-matni honona nor wutga mak kwatutu agama deullu-tatarni pa natiana , La hanmeni hota rmor tiarga Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa deno ?
They said to him , In Bethlehem of Judea , for this is written through the prophet , ||| Noma rwalolla riwra , Ama , la ' a Betlehem , let mak kden la Yudea nohananni-taniaratni de . Yoma la ' Puka ralamni de makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida e nhorat targa de niwra ,
‘ You Bethlehem , land of Judah , are in no way least among the princes of Judah , for out of you shall come a governor who shall shepherd my people , Israel . ' ||| Betlehema mak kdena Yudea ne , o kuku ' a-keke ' u la ' a leta-let no ' a Yehuda ri , mere plollolli de mureh dioin ir la yoma hota o letmu de ed maka kalgot nana mak ktorna-krautu ida mak ktera-kdema A u'pu-a'nu Israel re .
Then Herod secretly called the wise men , and learned from them exactly what time the star appeared . ||| La'pa nlernana lir maka ha rakot oleka re dewade Herodes nade ' a ralma-riorni pa npolga mak kwata'wa nohora wtiona lipni-laini re pa nmeh ' a natiana re pa nakot la niwra , Moweni mimkek nan ulga wtion de ? Noka rwalol nohora
He sent them to Bethlehem , and said , Go and search diligently for the young child . When you have found him , bring me word , so that I also may come and worship him . ||| dewade Herodes nhopna mak kwata'wa nohora wtiona re rodi liarni la Betlehem pa rwahakhak papay die . Herodes nalahar pa niwra , Mlia ' a pa mpiahaka plu'unu-plehenu keke'enku ' de mere mhioratreria la'pa mliernana keke'enku ' de miwal pia ma mikot mai a ' u totpena a ' muana lia ' pa ghu'ru-ghelam la ' a lakni nayanni wali .
They , having heard the king , went their way , and behold , the star , which they saw in the east , went before them until it came and stood over where the young child was . When they saw the star , they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy . ||| Noma mak kwata'wa nohora wtiona lipni-laini re rla'awa , de rahepuepur memna yoma ramkek nana wtion maka ha ramkek ulg oleka la tipur matni . Wtion de nala ulg ir pa la la'pa ntut tiarga reparni la ' a keke'enku ' de genni walli heyanna .
They came into the house and saw the young child with Mary , his mother , and they fell down and worshiped him . Opening their treasures , they offered to him gifts , gold , frankincense , and myrrh . ||| Noma rhu'ru la likit de nayanni de ramkek nana keke'en de nora inni Maria . Noma rwaltiora-rwaltieman la keke'en de nayanni , na'nama rhar dioinia wareher genni pa rala maha , ayalli nora mur la ' a keke'en de .
Being warned in a dream not to return to Herod , they went back to their own country another way . ||| Ne hota la ' a Uplerlawna Nano ' targa ir la mi'ini ralamni totpena yana rawal lia ' ray Herodes de , pede rwotar lol to ' a talla dom pa rla'awa nohoni-raini .
Now when they had departed , behold , an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream , saying , Arise and take the young child and his mother , and flee into Egypt , and stay there until I tell you , for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him . ||| La'pa mak kwata'wa wtiona re rla'awa dewade Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni nma nami ' a Yusup niwra , Yusup ee ! Mumata ! Plet pa mua'ala keke'enku ' de nor inni pa mpiatitin pa mlia'awa Mesir , yoma hota Herodes e nahak reri keke'en de pa nwenna . La'pa mdien nek la hande pa mpiei rer nieka pa a'ukot la tiy miy nampena miwali owa'ana .
He arose and took the young child and his mother by night and departed into Egypt , ||| Dewade Yusup namat doin la pa nodia keke'enku ' de nor inni pa rwatitin la Mesir , la ' mel de memna .
and was there until the death of Herod , that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet , saying , Out of Egypt I called my son . ||| Ha rhol nieka la Mesir la'pa Herodes nmati . La ' hade pede plola la hya ' ed maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot oleka la makwohorulu-ktatrulu de lirni niwra , Apuolga A A'nu de mak kdella Mesir pa nhargota .
Then Herod , when he saw that he was mocked by the wise men , was exceedingly angry , and sent out and killed all the male children who were in Bethlehem and in all the surrounding countryside , from two years old and under , according to the exact time which he had learned from the wise men . ||| La'pa Herodes nat niohora mak kwata'wa wtiona mak kwatiawu tipru re ralahar olek e ' wa dewade enawenan doin la . Noma nahak pa nwenna keke'enku ' de pede enhopan pa rwunu-rwenan momuoga lokmera-papay muanke ' a , maka ha rmor niana la ler de me la'pa rhol nian oleka noha wawannu anni wor tiututu . Yoma Herodes nlernohora ler meni maka mak kwata'wa wtiona re rakota la ' a ler maka ha ramkek ulga wtiona . Rhi ' a wniunu-wnienan lawan de la Betlehem Rahel letni de uhunu-ewatni nor wutga leta-leta mak rehgorgoru re wali .
Then that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled , saying , ||| La ' hade hota plola la hya ' maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yermia nakota niwra ,
A voice was heard in Ramah , lamentation , weeping and great mourning , Rachel weeping for her children , she would n't be comforted , because they are no more . ||| La ' a leta Rama de hota tatlin nana yapolu-yatniani mak ko ' a-kakru lol etnu liolli . Tatlin nana Rahel polpuolu-hawaun nohora upni-a'nani maka ha rwen oleka re . Riy riwra rhi ' Rahel pa ralamni namtiern owa'ana , mere Rahel edonna nhe'du et miemna ir lirni .
But when Herod was dead , behold , an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt , saying , ||| La'pa Herodes nmat wia de Yusup ed ma'ta la Mesir , noma Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni nma nami ' a Yusup owa'ana
Arise and take the young child and his mother , and go into the land of Israel , for those who sought the young child 's life are dead . ||| niwra , Yusup ee ! Herodes nor rimormiorni mak kiwa kwenna keke'en de rmati oleka wa pa mumat doin pa mua'ala keke'enku ' de nor inni pa miwal lia Israel wa .
He arose and took the young child and his mother , and came into the land of Israel . ||| Dewade Yusup namat doin la pa nora keke'en de nor inni pa rawal lia Israel wa .
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in the place of his father , Herod , he was afraid to go there . Being warned in a dream , he withdrew into the region of Galilee , ||| Mere la'pa Yusup natlin nan de Arkelaus ed mak kwau dioinia amni Herodes pa nhi ' ray lia ' Yudea , noma Yusup namta'ata nla ' a . La'pa nlernan owa'ana talan la Orgahi-Orha ' a la ' mi ' ralma noma rla'awa Galilea yapatni .
and came and lived in a city called Nazareth , that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets that he will be called a Nazarene . ||| La Galilea de rhol lia let mak kwawa Nasareta . La hade de hota plola la lir maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu re rakotkota la ' a keke'en de , riwra , Hota rwet E la riy mak kwatiawu Nasareta .
In those days , John the Baptizer came , preaching in the wilderness of Judea , saying , ||| Noma la ' nte'ela lerni pa Yohansi makharani riy nma nlola wo'orletna-kawurloini la ' Yudea yapatni . Enhar lirni pa
Repent , for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand ! ||| niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali ee ! Mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin do'omi-halmi re yoma hota edon nalo'on wali ne Uplerlawna Nwal lia Ray pa Nodi plolli la riy mormiorni !
For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet , saying , The voice of one crying in the wilderness , make the way of the Lord ready ! Make his paths straight ! ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la ' a Yohanis di niwra , Hota riy ida e polpuolu-hawaunia la wo'orletna-kawurloini pa niwra , Mpiahi ' targa talla la Orgahi-Orha ' a , mpiale'era loini-talanni !
Now John himself wore clothing made of camel 's hair with a leather belt around his waist . His food was locusts and wild honey . ||| Yohansi naniayarni de ra ' nana la onta wullu me rewni de ra ' nana la ha ulti me ya'anni-yemannu de kongoha nora gani turnu .
Then people from Jerusalem , all of Judea , and all the region around the Jordan went out to him . ||| Riy rahu rwatiawua Yerusalem , Yudea nohoni-raini re honona , me la ' walia gerlawna Yordan plahwani honona rriw niana pa rmai pia ratlin la Yohansi ha nakotkota .
They were baptized by him in the Jordan , confessing their sins . ||| Noka ir rakota plele'er momuoga do'oni-halli re , ne Yohansi nharania re la ' gerlawna Yordan .
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming for his baptism , he said to them , You offspring of vipers , who warned you to flee from the wrath to come ? ||| Riy Parisi mana liawanni ror wutga Saduki rmai lia Yohansi totpena rharania . Mere la'pa namkek tut niana rmai wia noma Yohansi nakot la re , Hoi ! Miy di de emolmolan nekama niy mak kodi nhienni yoma mhi ' tukla-wahla . He ' ed mak kiwra la'pa rharan nek miy demade hota Uplerlawna niukum lawanni mak kmai niek de hota edon nal miy ? !
Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance ! ||| Mere mtiutga la nhioli-liet kalwiedwedmi totpena riy ratga de plol toto ' a mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin oleka do'omi-halmi re wa .
Do n't think to yourselves , ‘ We have Abraham for our father , ' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones . ||| Yana mpiarora de hota miy edonna mliernan niukum lawna yoma upmi-tgarmi de Abraham . Yoma Uplerlawna nekane Nodi plolli pa Na'ala watu-watu ri pa Nhi ' a la Abrahama duratni-waitni .
Even now the ax lies at the root of the trees . Therefore every tree that does n't produce good fruit is cut down , and cast into the fire . ||| Mhioratreri ee ! Uplerlawna e Nwahi ' meman targa pa Nukmua he ' to ' a mak edon kolin doinia do'oni-halli . Yoma emeknekama Nwahi ' targa wro'onni pa na Netan dodioinia ora-au onni pa la ntut lia ga'arni re honona . La'pa ora-au muaka edon kawo ' a samomuounu de hota Nhoi wro'onni la pa Nnaklia la ai ralamni .
I indeed baptize you in water for repentance , but he who comes after me is mightier than I , whose sandals I am not worthy to carry . He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit . ||| A ' di Agala gera ga gharani miy , totpena ntutga de miy mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin oleka miy do'omi-halmi , mere mak hota kmai pia klernohor a ' di , de hota Nala Uplerlawna Nhiwni tiy miy me emekwalima Nala ai na Nharani miy . E Nareh dioin a ' u . Hota awue'er doin lakni wniowni ho'mana a ' g edonna puar nana .
His winnowing fork is in his hand , and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor . He will gather his wheat into the barn , but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire . ||| Ne hota emolmolan nekama E ' ed maka ktorreria totopa maka ra ralipra-ratai metma-wetra ' lawna gandum . Metma-wetra ' lawan de hota rawoka la ' a dudnu kliala ralamni , mere hota kownu re honona de rwalia la ai miaka takeni rwarum nana .
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John , to be baptized by him . ||| La ' lerni de , Yesus Nwatiawua Galilea pa Nla'awa gerlawna Yordan pa Nma Nwak Yohansi pa nharani E ' a .
But John would have hindered him , saying , I need to be baptized by you , and you come to me ? ||| Mere Yohansi edonna nreiniana wakwakni de . Yohansi nakot la , Ame , la ' a plollolli de A'mu nanpena ed maka kharania a ' u . Mere la ' dodo'ondi de he ' nakota de hota A'mu Nmai pia agharania ?
But Jesus , answering , said to him , Allow it now , for this is the fitting way for us to fulfill all righteousness . Then he allowed him . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la , Hyalia , emkadella la ' dodo'ondi to ' a . Yoma la emkade de hota itsi ' momuog oleka hya ' mak kaplol la Orgahi-Orha ' a yamkekni . Dewade Yohansi nharania Yesus .
Jesus , when he was baptized , went up directly from the water , and behold , the heavens were opened to him . He saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove , and coming on him . ||| La'pa rharania la gera ralamni pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nrei lia gera aratni emkadi de , plin-plinnianama lyanti ema rhar dioinia , ne Yesus Namkek de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nerun de emolmolla ma'nu lmo'ma maru merpati pa Ntai lia E wawannu .
Behold , a voice out of the heavens said , This is my beloved Son , with whom I am well pleased . ||| Nhor nioma ratlin de Uplerlawna Nhar lirni la ' a lyanti Niwra , A A'nu maka Asiayni inhatti . E ' ed maka kla ' nana A ralmu .
Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil . ||| Nhor nioma Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodia Yesus pa Nla'awa wo'orletna-kawurloini totpena hegana amlawanni nta'aga .
When he had fasted forty days and forty nights , he was hungry afterward . ||| Yesus edonna Na'an nana lera terampwogata , mela terampwogata , pa Naplarlar memna .
The tempter came and said to him , If you are the Son of God , command that these stones become bread . ||| Noma hegana amlawanni maka rweta la mak kta'aga nmai pia nakot la , Hoi ! Uplerlawna A'nani O ' a toh ? ! Mhuopan teka watgau ri rwal tiek la yamanna pa Omu'una .
But he answered , It is written , ‘ Man shall not live by bread alone , but by every word that proceeds out of God 's mouth . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Hota A ' g edon liernohora o lirmu de , yoma la ' Puka ralamni de nakot nohor oleka de , Rimormiori edonna rmormior die yoma la ' a yamanna nmeh ' a mere rimormiori rlernana mormiori , yoma la ' a Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu honona .
Then the devil took him into the holy city . He set him on the pinnacle of the temple , ||| Nhorwua demade hegana nodia Yesus pa nla'awa la Yerusalem , na'nama nkenia Yesus la Uplerlawna roma kreini wuwannu pa Ntutrier lia hande ,
and said to him , If you are the Son of God , throw yourself down , for it is written , ‘ He will command his angels concerning you , ' and , ‘ On their hands they will bear you up , so that you do n't dash your foot against a stone . ' ||| na'nama hegana nakot la Yesus Niwra , Plola O ' di de Uplerlawna A'nani O ' a de Mniehgerun tek la ! Yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e niwra , Hota Uplerlawna Nhopna hopopanni pa rkim o ' a totpena yana mtiuini ne watgau mana hota edonna rtai o ' a .
Jesus said to him , Again , it is written , ‘ You shall not test the Lord , your God . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mere la ' a Puka ralamni wal miana e niwra , Yan memmemna rimormiori rta'aga Orgahi-Orha ' a mak kla ' ir Uplerlawanni yoma ir rhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kpodpodku-kpadpadku dewade rwak la Orgahi-Orha ' a pa Namori-nalewn ira .
Again , the devil took him to an exceedingly high mountain , and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory . ||| Nhor nioma hegana nodi owa'ana Yesus pa rla'awa wo'or tutul liawna id hananni , na'nama ntut momuoga hairi-hairi noha-rai honona ror wut nieka re'eni-tniarnu re honona .
He said to him , I will give you all of these things , if you will fall down and worship me . ||| Noma hegana nakot la Yesus niwra , Hota agala hari honon tiy O ' a , mere Ompuayow pa Mriu ' u-mtiowar plein la a la'ku nayanni .
Then Jesus said to him , Get behind me , Satan ! For it is written , ‘ You shall worship the Lord your God , and you shall serve him only . ' ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la , Rho'orgo'tu la a ga'yu ralamni hega'nu ne ! La ' Puka de e rhorat targ oleka , Riy honona rhu'ru-rhelam la Orgahi-Orha ' a ir Uplerlawanni me ratlina-ratail tio'ola Ha Nakotkota .
Then the devil left him , and behold , angels came and served him . ||| Nhorwua noma hegana nhoitio'or la Yesus , ne Uplerlawna hopopanni re rma ramkek la E ' a .
Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up , he withdrew into Galilee . ||| Noma lera ida ne , Yesus Natlin nana rtorn oleka hyalli Yohansi pa rkenia la roma nhio'la ralamni pede Yesus Nwadur la Yudea yapatni pa Nwarei lia Galilea yapatni .
Leaving Nazareth , he came and lived in Capernaum , which is by the sea , in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali , ||| La ' hande de Yesus Nlola leta Nasaret de E geni ulullu pa Nla ' pa Ndella leta Kapernaum la ' a danau Galilea aratni la ' a Sebulon nora Naftali nohoni-raini .
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet , saying , ||| Maka Yesus Nhi ' nana re honona de ntutga de Uplerlawna lirni maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya e nhorat targa de naplola , yoma Uplerlawna lirni emkadille ,
The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali , toward the sea , beyond the Jordan , Galilee of the Gentiles , ||| Sebulon nor Naftali nohananni-taniaratni mak kden la talan mak klola danau Galilea aratni , la ' a gerlawna Yordan walli warta , de Galilea gen miaka Yahudi atia ' a rdel wal lia .
the people who sat in darkness saw a great light , to those who sat in the region and shadow of death , to them light has dawned . ||| De lupmu-a'namu mak kden la melli-kalamni , rler olek la lelerni . La'pa mak kden la leta-ruhuna maka do'oni-halli harahu mak kodia matmiati-molmuolu , de rat niohora oleka talla pa rlernana mormiori-lelewanni .
From that time , Jesus began to preach , and to say , Repent ! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand . ||| La'pa nte'ela lera-mela re wa , dewade Yesus Nmeh ' a ed mak Nakota Niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin do'omi-halmi , yoma ntutu-nte ' olek pa hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la riy emeka ir Rayni . La ' ler de pa nodi liarni nhi'inde Nakot emkade la ' rira .
Walking by the sea of Galilee , he saw two brothers , Simon , who is called Peter , and Andrew , his brother , casting a net into the sea , for they were fishermen . ||| La'pa lera ida ne Yesus Nalala ' rer mia'ta la danau aratni la Galilea dewade Namkek nana riy woru , de Simon maka ha rpol walia la Petrus nor hyalli Andarias ratialtial reria i'na la ' a danau de , yoma hare kniarni hade .
He said to them , Come after me , and I will make you fishers for men . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Ee , ma mliernohor A ' g ee ! Mai pia Awuatut miy totpena la ' emkameni la miy mitial reri i'na la dodo'ondi , de hota emkade wal pia mihak rimormiori totpena hota rpesiay mai A ' u .
They immediately left their nets and followed him . ||| Noma rleretniekla rteman taru tialli , ne rlernohora Yesus .
Going on from there , he saw two other brothers , James the son of Zebedee , and John his brother , in the boat with Zebedee their father , mending their nets . He called them . ||| Yesus Nodi liarni noma Namkek nana riy id nanni Yakowsi nor hyalli Yohansi ror wut nieka amni Sebedeus pa e rwalola tiala la puounu ralamni . Noma Yesus Npol walia re , Mmiai ee !
They immediately left the boat and their father , and followed him . ||| Rleretniekla Yakowsi nor hyalli raltarga amni la puounu ralamni pa rlernohor walia Yesus lidanni de .
Jesus went about in all Galilee , teaching in their synagogues , preaching the Good News of the Kingdom , and healing every disease and every sickness among the people . ||| Noma Yesus Nwaloha-nwalakat la Galilea liewnu uhunu-ewatni Nwatutu-nwaye'ela roma-lewu maka nhi'inde Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli re . Enakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de Niwra hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka Ray . Ne E Nhi ' wal pia rira nnienni-nhienni mehrani-maunu honona rkalwieda .
The report about him went out into all Syria . They brought to him all who were sick , afflicted with various diseases and torments , possessed with demons , epileptics , and paralytics , and he healed them . ||| Makden la Siria uhunu-ewatni ratlin nana Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni , pa nhi'nande rira rhorat la pa rmai . Rma rodia riy mak klernana nnieni-nhiena , mehra-mau , no ' a-rara , maka hegana nhu ' r ralma , kapiphyaya'ala , riy mak inonni kmati . Rodi mak ksaki re honona pa Yesus Nhi ' a pa rkalwieda momuou .
Great multitudes from Galilee , Decapolis , Jerusalem , Judea , and from beyond the Jordan followed him . ||| Riy rahu rlernohor reria Yesus la ' ler de . Dom de rwatiawu Galilea liewnu , dom de rwatiawua gen miaka ha rweta Leta Termida Dekapolis , dom de rwatiawua letlawna Yerusalem . Dom de rwatiawua Yudea lowanni me dom mana e rwatiawu wal lia gen miaka kden la gerlawna Yordan walli .
Seeing the multitudes , he went up onto the mountain . When he had sat down , his disciples came to him . ||| Lera ida ne , la'pa Yesus Namkek nana riy rahu rma rawoka dewade Enha'at la wo'ora hananni pa Namtatna pa Niwa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a . Mak nhi'inde ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rlernohora reria E ' a pa rmai pia rwakriania .
He opened his mouth and taught them , saying , ||| Noma Yesus Nna'ona wniatutnu-wniaye'eni la ' a ir honona Niwra ,
Blessed are the poor in spirit , for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mitlina , hota unut lawna la riy maka edon kpar la lirni-yatnu wamueheni mere rawniair to'ola Orgahi-Orha ' a yoma riy mak emkare rre ' temn olek la Uplerlawna horatni-hairni limni-rorni maka Enodi plolli la emeka Ray .
Blessed are those who mourn , for they shall be comforted . ||| Ina-nara , hota unut lawna wal lia ' riy maka ralamni kmayo ' a-kmata ' u yoma hota Uplerlawna ed maka khi ' ralamni re pa rahepru .
Blessed are the gentle , for they shall inherit the earth . ||| Hota unut lawna wal lia ' a riy maka khu'ru-khelma rendah hati la ' a rimormior wialli yoma hota Uplerlawna ed mak kala hare honona maka Enakot targa la e ' a .
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness , for they shall be filled . ||| Hota unut lawna la riy maka ralamni nwahak nekpa nhi ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , yoma hota Uplerlawna ed mak kapenu-kalawna ir ralamni wakwakni de .
Blessed are the merciful , for they shall obtain mercy . ||| Hota unut lawna wal lia ' a riy maka ktutga ralam kalwiedni la rimormior wialli yoma hota Uplerlawna mana Ntutga ralam kalwiedni wal lia ira .
Blessed are the pure in heart , for they shall see God . ||| Hota unut lawna wal lia ' a riy maka ralamni kaple'er reri , yoma hota riy de hota nor Uplerlawna la ' geni ida .
Blessed are the peacemakers , for they shall be called children of God . ||| Hota unut lawna wal lia ' a riy maka kpolliohora rimormior wiali la ' a yahuri-yawo'ora totpa rkalwieda owa'ana , yoma hota riy de Uplerlawna ed mak khor wut wualia ir la E upni-a'nani .
Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness ' sake , for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven . ||| Ina-nara , hota unut lawna la ' a riy maka kler la kropanni-krieutnu yoma nhi ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , yoma hota riy de nanni ed walia Uplerlawna limni-rorni mutnu-rahanu , maka Enodi plolli la ' emeka Ray .
Blessed are you when people reproach you , persecute you , and say all kinds of evil against you falsely , for my sake . ||| Unut lawna wal lia ' a miy maka klernana nniahora-nniala ' a yapolu-yaliella wniohora weyata-wniatra weyata yoma mliernohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka A'ukota tiy miy .
Rejoice , and be exceedingly glad , for great is your reward in heaven . For that is how they persecuted the prophets who were before you . ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu la ' a miy upmi-tgarmi lerni ho'mana rlernan oleka yamuki-yama'ala re , pede la'pa mimlier la yamuki-yama'ala yapupu-yaheri , de mimuki-mihepur meman nohora , yoma miy siepmi-kaimi inpona la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha Sorga maka hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala tiy miy .
You are the salt of the earth , but if the salt has lost its flavor , with what will it be salted ? It is then good for nothing , but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy di de emeka kio ' nohkerna wawannu . Mere la'pa kio ' de edonna nmahana , de ta'en niana ra'itr owa'ana ha mahanni toh ? ! Kio ' de hota nwalia hamamuamua . Edon rnair nan owa'ana noka rhopliala , pa riy rwatei-rwahapra la ' tani wawannu .
You are the light of the world . A city located on a hill ca n't be hidden . ||| Ne miy di mana emolmolan nekama repreparni mak khita-krepra la noha wawannu pede riy ramkeka . Miy emekwalima let maka kden la wo'ora wawannu , de edonna nayade ' a .
Neither do you light a lamp and put it under a measuring basket , but on a stand , and it shines to all who are in the house . ||| It edonna tatlin etia de riy rtutni wa'du nanpena rala ktopra ra rkadwua pitpitga . Mere nhi'inde rkenia wa'du della wniatatgenni totpena lelera la riy honona mak kden la roma nayanni .
Even so , let your light shine before men , that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven . ||| Emkade wal lia mormiormi de nrepar nana rimormior wialmi herni-gaini , totpena riy ramkek nana nhioli-liet kalwiedwedmi demade ra'uli-rawedia Amlawanmi la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Do n't think that I came to destroy the law or the prophets . I did n't come to destroy , but to fulfill . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yana mpiarora de Amuai pia hota ghap dioinia Musa deullu-tatarni nor wut walia makwohorulu-ktatrulu re wniatutnu-wniaye'eni , mere Amuai die totpena deulu-tatra re rtutu-rte'ewa la ' a hya ' maka Aghi ' nana-yap niana re .
For most certainly , I tell you , until heaven and earth pass away , not even one smallest letter or one tiny pen stroke shall in any way pass away from the law , until all things are accomplished . ||| Hya ' maka A'ukota di naplol memna . La ' hade pede mhioratreria me ! Lyanti nora nohkeran di e nayamkek ma'ta , de hota mak ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni , hurpu nora titikni id mana hota taken niana rhap dioinia la deulu-tatra , la'pa rwei niek la lera maka hare honona maka Uplerlawna ha Nakotkota rtutu-rte'ewa .
Therefore , whoever shall break one of these least commandments and teach others to do so , shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven , but whoever shall do and teach them shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven . ||| La ' hade pede la'pa riy ida edon nlernohora deulu-tatra re kuku ' id ho'mana me nwatutga riy dom pa yana rlernohora deulu-tatar de , de hota nwal lia riy mak edon rwetwet la nanni la ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re , maka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la pa emek ir Rayni . Mere la'pa rwaldioinia de , la riy maka klernohora deulu-tatra re , me nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy dom pa rhi ' emekwalima e ' a , de hota nwal lia riy maka ha rwetwet la nanni la ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re honona .
For I tell you that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees , there is no way you will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven . ||| La ' hade pede mhioratreria ! Makwatutu-kwaye ' a deulu-tatra agama re ror wutga riy Parisi re rlernohor walia agama deullu-tatarni mere edon rhi ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Mere riy mak kla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la pa emeka ir Rayni de rala ralamni tetema pa rhi ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
You have heard that it was said to the ancient ones , ‘ You shall not murder , ' and ‘ Whoever murders will be in danger of the judgment . ' ||| Miy e miat niohor oleka wa la ' it upni-tgarni lerni rlernan oleka deulu-tatar di , de yana mpiunu-mpienna yoma he ' a e nwunu-nwenna de hota nler la niukamnu .
But I tell you that everyone who is angry with his brother without a cause will be in danger of the judgment . Whoever says to his brother , ‘ Raca ! ' will be in danger of the council . Whoever says , ‘ You fool ! ' will be in danger of the fire of Gehenna . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de A'ukot tiy miy , la'pa riy ida nawenan la rimormior wialli de hota nlernan wali niukamnu , me he ' maka kwohora weyata-ktatar weyata riy niwra , O ' di de riy podku-padku ! de hota rodia la letgar lawawna la ' a mak khudi-kpar la agama deullu-tatarni . Ne he ' ed mak kwarenna riy pa niwra , Mak kaplinu-kaplo ' a o ' a ! de hota rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni .
If therefore you are offering your gift at the altar , and there remember that your brother has anything against you , ||| La'pa it idma nor ida tawenna , de hade edon nla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni . La hade pede la'pa miy mana e miwra miala prehenmi-maumi dom la Uplerlawna la ' a katri'ana wawannu , noma mhioratnana riy e rahankeran la miy
leave your gift there before the altar , and go your way . First be reconciled to your brother , and then come and offer your gift . ||| de yana miala pleinia prehenmi-maumi de mere mlia ' pa miora pleinia riy de mkialwieda , nanpena miwal pia la'pa miala prehenmi-maumi de la Uplerlawna .
Agree with your adversary quickly while you are with him on the way , lest perhaps the prosecutor deliver you to the judge , and the judge deliver you to the officer , and you be cast into prison . ||| La'pa yanhi'pa riy doma e raklak miy , de miora riy de mpiak pa mkialwieda pleini la ' a talan letgar memna totpena yana mlia ' nek la letgar lawan de la ' a makhudi-makpara gaini . Yoma la'pa edonan de hota riy de nal miy lia makhudi-makpara mak hota nal owa'an miy lia hgei mak kodi hapa'pani polisi o'tani , noma hota hgei nho'la miy lia roma nhio'la ralamni .
Most certainly I tell you , you shall by no means get out of there until you have paid the last penny . ||| Ne mhioratreria ! Hota miy edon mliergot la roma nhio'la de ralamni , la'pa rwei pia mpiair dioinia papiairmi honona .
You have heard that it was said , ‘ You shall not commit adultery , ' ||| Miy e miat niohora oleka deulu-tatar di , de e niwra , Yana milira-miliai .
but I tell you that everyone who gazes at a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de A'ukot tiy miy , la'pa mimkek nan tututga patke ' id pa na'hira-nadadia miy die , de miy die emekwalima miliai oleka patke ' de wa , yoma mtieltel aparmi la ' a patke ' de .
If your right eye causes you to stumble , pluck it out and throw it away from you . For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna . ||| La'pa matmi malganna nod miy lia do ' a-hala de , de hota mkiopil doinia matmi della pa mhiopliala . Miolin doin neka matmi mak kodi miy lia do ' a-hal de . Yanpa matmi de narieiniande miy inonmi honona rnaklia la ai mormiori ralamni naraka .
If your right hand causes you to stumble , cut it off , and throw it away from you . For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish , than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna . ||| La'pa limmi malganna ed maka khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala de mdieul dioinia pa mhiopliala . Miolin doinia la wa . Yanpa limmi wali de narieiniande inonmi tetema rnaklia la ' ai mormiori ralamni .
It was also said , ‘ Whoever shall put away his wife , let him give her a writing of divorce , ' ||| Deulu-tatar dom maka mitlin oleka de emkadi wali , de la'pa riy id niwra nhopliala patke'eni , de hota nala horta yapie'era la hawni patke ' de .
but I tell you that whoever puts away his wife , except for the cause of sexual immorality , makes her an adulteress , and whoever marries her when she is put away commits adultery . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de A'ukot tiy miy ta'en niana muanke ' id nhopliala patke'eni eneknek to'ama hawa patke ' de nor muanke ' dom de ralira-raliai . Mere la'pa hawa patke ' de edon nalira-naliai mere emkade ho'mana muanke'eni de enhoplial nek e ' wa , hawa muanke ' hihi'ini de nareiniande hawni patke ' de pa nalira-naliai . Yoma la'pa hawni patke ' de nmehlim owa'an de , hade de yalira-yaliai la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Ne muanke ' mak kmehlimpa kora patke ' maka kpaletan nohora muanke'eni , de nhi ' wali yalira-yaliai lia Uplerlawna yamkekni !
Again you have heard that it was said to the ancient ones , ‘ You shall not make false vows , but shall perform to the Lord your vows , ' ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mimiat niohor wal lia ' it upni-tgarni lerni de rlernan oleka deulu-tatar di , de hya ' ed maka mikot targ oleka la Orgahi-Orha ' a , la'pa mliokar nohora oleka wa , de mliernohora honona . Yana mpiera-mdiaiti hare .
but I tell you , do n't swear at all , neither by heaven , for it is the throne of God , ||| Mere la'pa dodo'ondi mana A'ukot nohor la miy , de yan memmemna mliokra onde mpialokra pa ma miplol nohora lirmi-tunmi . Yana mliokra pa mpiet la lyanit lawna , yoma lyanit de Uplerlawna yaliwangenni tahkta inhatte !
nor by the earth , for it is the footstool of his feet , nor by Jerusalem , for it is the city of the great King . ||| La walia yana mpiet la nohkerna pa mliokra onde mpialokra , yoma nohkeran di de Uplerlawna E Nhapar reria nohkeran di . Onde mliokar de mpiet walia Yerusalem , yoma Yerusalem de mana , Uplerlawna mak kla ' Ray Lialawna de genni-tienni .
Neither shall you swear by your head , for you ca n't make one hair white or black . ||| Yana mliokra onde mpialokra de mniairia o'ta-wat wuamuehemi yoma morat lihirmi id ho'mana miy mieh ' a nek de taken niana mhierun doinia pa nwawahra onde nmetmetma yoma it moratnu metmetma onde wawahra hota emkade pa nodi liarni .
But let your ‘ Yes ' be ‘ Yes ' and your ‘ No ' be ‘ No . ' Whatever is more than these is of the evil one . ||| Mere mpiet nek la , Yowa aghi ' a hade , onde A ' g edonna ghi ' hade , totpena yana milahara rimormior wialmi . Mere la'pa miala hya'-hya ' pa ma mpiayow nammi de hade de hegana amlawanni karkiarni hare .
You have heard that it was said , ‘ An eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth . ' ||| Miatg olek walia deulu-tatar di niwra , Mata nherun mata , niha mana nherun niha .
But I tell you , do n't resist him who is evil , but whoever strikes you on your right cheek , turn to him the other also . ||| Mere A'ukota la miy , yana mpiahla hankerna-ralmha'ara maka riy rhi ' a tiy miy . La'pa riy rpahara kilmi malganna , de miala kilmi walli malwiru pa rpahar walia .
If anyone sues you to take away your coat , let him have your cloak also . ||| Ne la'pa riy rod miy lia letgar lawawna totpena rwarui-rwate'la naniair no ' inonmi , de hota miy rain plalahwa samomuoumi de mial walia naniayarmi mak yatyat no ' inonmi mak ha nwahaka de .
Whoever compels you to go one mile , go with him two . ||| La'pa riy dom nmai pia namer matni pa nhopna mikwara e hyonni-hyanni pa mila ' nana kilu id olietni , de mitahan rer lia pa mila ' nana kilu woru .
Give to him who asks you , and do n't turn away him who desires to borrow from you . ||| La'pa riy rwak hadom tiy miy , de yan mitawra . Ne yana mpiayotlia rira mak kwak pa riwra ra'otna-ra'ar la tiy miy .
You have heard that it was said , ‘ You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy . ' ||| Miy e miat walia deulu-tatar di , de e niwra , Mhi ' kalwiedweda rimormior wialmi ne mpiahla riy yatyata hihi'ini tiy miy .
But I tell you , love your enemies , bless those who curse you , do good to those who hate you , and pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you , ||| Mere A'ukot hadi tiy miy lia ' dodo'ondi de , mihaka mak khi ' yatyat tiy miy pa mhi ' samomuou rer lia . Msiumbainia riy maka kamuki-kama'ala miy .
that you may be children of your Father who is in heaven . For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good , and sends rain on the just and the unjust . ||| Totpena mtiutga la ilu-wniehwami de , Uplerlawna mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha upni-a'nani miy . Yoma Uplerlawna Nwer rer miatni la riy maka kyata-khala ror wutga riy maka kwehwa ploi-ple'era . E ' ed maka khuriernia otna me nhi ' lera pa nhit la ' a riy mak kaplola ror wal lia riy mak khala .
For if you love those who love you , what reward do you have ? Do n't even the tax collectors do the same ? ||| Yoma la'pa miy mtiulla-msiayni to ' a riy maka nhi'inde khi ' kalwiedwed tiy miy de hota Uplerlawna edon Na'uli miy pa Nala hihi'imi de wniahlani . Yoma miy miatg olek de , riy yatyata emeka mak kawoka blastena , nek de e rtulla-rsayni walia mak khi ' samomuou ira toh !
If you only greet your friends , what more do you do than others ? Do n't even the tax collectors do the same ? ||| Ne la'pa miy makpesiay mtiutga nhiu'ru-nhielammi la miy mutwualmi to ' a , de hihi'imi re edon nareh dioin riy mak kaplin niohora ma'ta Uplerlawna yoma rimormior mak kaplin niohor Uplerlawna nek de rhi ' wali emkare .
Therefore you shall be perfect , just as your Father in heaven is perfect . ||| La ' hade pede mliernohora miy Amlawanmi la Ilyamou-Watyatoha yehwani mak kara ' a-kapalga riy honona edonna nkei-nhelta rira gaini , yoma wniehwa-liakat de plol toto ' a la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Be careful that you do n't do your charitable giving before men , to be seen by them , or else you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mhioratreria , yana mtiutga hihi'imi-yapyapmi mak kalwiedweda re la ' a riy gaini ralamni . La'pa mimhi ' emkade de hota miy edonna mliernana liwatmi-odapmi wniahlani la ' a Uplerlawna miy Amlawanmi makdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Therefore , when you do merciful deeds , do n't sound a trumpet before yourself , as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets , that they may get glory from men . Most certainly I tell you , they have received their reward . ||| Pede la'pa miy miala hadom la riy mak kakleha-kaplara , de yana mpio'on nohora emekneka riy yatyata rhi ' nana yoma riwra rtot inonni la riy kalwiedweda . Yana mliernohora riy maka rhi ' harella gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la me la ' walia la ' a loi liawna-talan lawna totpena riy ra'ulia re . Mitlina , mak emkare de ha rlernan oleka siewni la ' a riy ya'ulli-yawedni . Mere ya'ulli-yawedni olek hadewa . Hota Uplerlawna edon Na'uli-nawed ira .
But when you do merciful deeds , do n't let your left hand know what your right hand does , ||| Mere la'pa miy miala hadom la riy mak kakleha-kaplara de , yana mkiokan nohora totpena miy mutwualmi ho'mana yana ratga .
so that your merciful deeds may be in secret , then your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly . ||| Mhierer nohora neka hya ' maka ha mhi ' a re totpena yana riy ratga . Mak kat niohora de enekneka Amlawanmi no ' Heyanan to ' a . Enamkek oleka hya ' maka ha mhierer nohora pa mhi ' a re pede hota E ' ed mak kala siepmi-kaimi .
When you pray , you shall not be as the hypocrites , for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets , that they may be seen by men . Most certainly , I tell you , they have received their reward . ||| La'pa msiumbaini de yana mliernohor riy mak ktutga yehwa mak kaplola mere la ' ralamni de yatyatni-halalli ed ma'ta la munafik . Ir suksukni de rsumbain de raprir lia riy gaini ralamni la ' a krei me la ' wal lia loi-talla aratni totpena plet pa riy ratg ira . Mhioratreria ! Riy mak emkade rlernan oleka siewni-kaini la ' a riy ya'ulli-yawedni . Mere ya'ulli-yawedni olek hade wa . Hota Uplerlawna edon Na'uli-nawedi ira .
But you , when you pray , enter into your inner room , and having shut your door , pray to your Father who is in secret , and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly . ||| Mere la ' miy die , la'pa mimsiumbaini de , mhio'la rommi nhiarni nanpena mpiol lia Amlawanmi maka edon kayamkeka . Pede hota Amlawanmi Namkek reria miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi mak edonna kayamkek la rimormior wialmi re , ne E ' ed mak kala miy kaimi .
In praying , do n't use vain repetitions as the Gentiles do , for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking . ||| La'pa mimsiumbain de yana miti'ila-miwal hya ' maka mikota re pa plo ' a-plahwa rehia , emeknekama riy mak kaplin niohora ma'ta Uplerlawna . Ha ratniekame ir wakwakni re hota nayatlin nan olekwa yoma ira sniumbaini re plahwa .
Therefore do n't be like them , for your Father knows what things you need before you ask him . ||| Yana mliernohora re . Yoma miy edonna mpiak ma'ta hade wa de , Amlawanmi no ' Heyanna Nat niohor olek hya ' maka mikleh ma'ta .
Pray like this , ‘ Our Father in heaven , may your name be kept holy . ||| Pede msiumbain de emkadilla , A Am mamni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . O ' de Mueh ' a Mupriri-mukded la genmu-tienmu . Ampak de nhiu'ru-nhielma ya'unni-yamta'ata nmai reri O ' dee !
Let your Kingdom come . Let your will be done on earth as it is in heaven . ||| Ampei-mnar reria lodanmu-hairmu . Ampaka pa O ralma-riormu de , mak kden la noha wawannu rlernohor reria pa emekwalima maka ha rhi ' a la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Give us today our daily bread . ||| Mhi ' apehera a apun mamni la ' yamanan mak Omual pa ama'an la ' ler di .
Forgive us our debts , as we also forgive our debtors . ||| Mumou-muwitna a do ' a-hal mamni emekwalima am miana mhoratdoinia riy do'oni-halli mai ami .
Bring us not into temptation , but deliver us from the evil one . For yours is the Kingdom , the power , and the glory forever . Amen . ' ||| Yana Muolin doin limmu-mpue'er rormu mai ami , yanpa la'pa hegana-kawnu rta'ag am die , hota amler la do ' a-hala ralamni . Mere Muwohor doinia hegana rurni-karatni mai ami . O ' ed mak ktoran reria lodna-hairi me Mumrehi-mumda'ar nohora hititmu-repreparmu pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
For if you forgive men their trespasses , your heavenly Father will also forgive you . ||| La'pa mhioratdoinia rira yatyatni-halalli do'oni-halli maka ha rhi ' nan tiy miy die hota miy Amlawanmi no ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha ho'mana Namou-nawitna do ' a-hala maka ha mhi ' nan oleka re .
But if you do n't forgive men their trespasses , neither will your Father forgive your trespasses . ||| Mere la'pa miy edon mhioratdoinia rira do'oni-halli maka ha rhi ' nan tiy miy die , de hota miy Amlawanmi mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha mana edonna Namou-nawitna do'omi-halmi .
Moreover when you fast , do n't be like the hypocrites , with sad faces . For they disfigure their faces that they may be seen by men to be fasting . Most certainly I tell you , they have received their reward . ||| La'pa mitahan lara , de yana mtiot pa mhi ' malului gaimi pa riy ratga emeknekama riy mak kiwra ktutga yehwa mak kaplola mere la ralamni de yatyatni-halalli ed ma'ta la munafik . Yana mliernohora ira yoma ir er maka khi ' herni-gaini re totpena rtutga de ir ratahan lara . Mhioratreria , rimormiori ya'ulli-yawedni to ' a ed maka khi ' hare siewni-kaini .
But you , when you fast , anoint your head and wash your face , ||| Mere la'pa mitahan lara , de mirarga gaimi pa nmomuou , ne mhiola-mkia'ata moratmi ,
so that you are not seen by men to be fasting , but by your Father who is in secret , and your Father , who sees in secret , will reward you . ||| totpena riy raplinga de miy e mitahan lara . Eneknek to'ama Amlawanmi no ' Heyanna mak edonna kayamkek de nanpena Enat niohora miy e mitahan lara . E ' ed maka kamkek reria hihi'imi-yapyapmi mak kayade ' a pede hota Nal miy siepmi-kaimi .
Do n't lay up treasures for yourselves on the earth , where moth and rust consume , and where thieves break through and steal , ||| Yana miakokan nohora re ' a-tniaru mak kden la nohkeran di wawannu yoma hota erieri nora karte ' a ra'ana re , ne hota mak kamna ' a rma rwuri-rgalam nana re .
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven , where neither moth nor rust consume , and where thieves do n't break through and steal , ||| La samomuounu de miwoka-mile'ega re ' a-tniaru mak kdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha yoma erieri nora karte ' a hota edonna ra'ana re . Me mak kamna ' a re ho'mana edonna rmai pia rkamna ' nana re .
for where your treasure is , there your heart will be also . ||| Miwoka re ' a-tniaru la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha yoma hota la meni pa miy re'emi-tniarmi erla de hota miy ralammi et wal lia hande .
The lamp of the body is the eye . If therefore your eye is sound , your whole body will be full of light . ||| It matni nhi ' wa'du mormiori la it inonni . La'pa matmi yamkekni lelera , de inonmi tetema mana hitita-reprepra .
But if your eye is evil , your whole body will be full of darkness . If therefore the light that is in you is darkness , how great is the darkness ! ||| Mere la'pa matmi npon wa , de inonmi tetema mana melmela-kalkalma . Ne la'pa wa'du mak kden la inonmi ralamni de melmela de hota mel'uta-malien memna .
No one can serve two masters , for either he will hate the one and love the other , or else he will be devoted to one and despise the other . You ca n't serve both God and Mammon . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , riy ida ta'en niana natlin la matroma riy woru . Yoma hota natlin samomuou lia ida ne la handina de edonna natlin kalwiedwed la . Emkade wal lia miy . Hota ta'en niana mimpiaror to ' a re ' a-tniar nohkerna gahani me mial wal'sia ihrami tetema pa mhima-mrie ' a Uplerlawna kniarni .
Therefore I tell you , do n't be anxious for your life , what you will eat , or what you will drink , nor yet for your body , what you will wear . Is n't life more than food , and the body more than clothing ? ||| La ' hade pede mhioratreria , yana mimta'at nohora hya ' maka hota ha mi'ina-miemnia onde la ' a hya ' ed maka ha mhiewta-mniairia . Miplinga de mormior die narehia ya'ana-yemnu , ne inonmi de nareh niana hewewta-naniairi ? !
See the birds of the sky , that they do n't sow , neither do they reap , nor gather into barns . Your heavenly Father feeds them . Are n't you of much more value than they ? ||| Mimkek tek la onu-ma'nu nemnema re . Ir edonna rawuli-ratniamni , me ir edonna rreiki-rwo'ora , me ira edonna rdudnu rieiki-wnio'orni re . La'pa emkade ho'mana Amlawanmi mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Ntera-ndem wali ira . Miplinga de Uplerlawna Nsaynia miy die nareh dioinia onu-ma'nu rena ? !
Which of you by being anxious , can add one moment to his lifespan ? ||| Rimormiori maka ralamni worwuorga onde namta'ata matmiatni ho'mana takeni nhaur nan aranni oke ' nmeh ' a totpena edonan nmati .
Why are you anxious about clothing ? Consider the lilies of the field , how they grow . They do n't toil , neither do they spin , ||| Hya ' a nariei pia ralammi worworga la hewewta-naniayarmi ? Mimkek la kihir mak kadeutu mak kmor lia rai mtatanni re . Kihir mak kadeutu re edonna rkari me edonna ratenni-ramairi .
yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of these . ||| Mere mhioratreria , ray Salomo mak kre ' a-ktar die nek de edonna nhewta-nnairia naniairi samomuounu pa emeknekama kihir mak kadeutu re .
But if God so clothes the grass of the field , which today exists and tomorrow is thrown into the oven , wo n't he much more clothe you , you of little faith ? ||| Wewna mak kden la rai mtatanni re rmor lia ler di mere repar dewade rrinnia la ai ralamni . Wewan nek de Uplerlawna Nahowna-nakgara pede samoga la yamkekni . Mere miy die edon mpiesiaya de wewna nekane Uplerlawna Ntera-ndema ne , yaho'ma miy ? !
Therefore do n't be anxious , saying , ‘ What will we eat ? ' , ‘ What will we drink ? ' or , ‘ With what will we be clothed ? ' ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Uplerlawna hota Ntera-ndem miy pede yan mimta'at nande miwra , Adoh hota ama'ana hya ' a , me amemnu hya ' ee ? Onde hota amhewta-mnairia hya ' a ?
For the Gentiles seek after all these things , for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things . But seek first God 's Kingdom and his righteousness , and all these things will be given to you as well . ||| Riy maka kaplin mua'ta Uplerlawna nekane er mak kahakhak nohora hare honona . Mere miy die Amlawanmi no ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nat niohora oleka miy e mpiaka perlu hare honona . La ' hade pede mihak ulga totpena Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la ' a mormiormi-dardiarmi , me totpena mhi ' hya ' mak kaplol la E yamkekni , ne hota hya ' maka mikleha de hota Enal momuoga tiy miy .
Therefore do n't be anxious for tomorrow , for tomorrow will be anxious for itself . Each day 's own evil is sufficient . ||| Hade pede yana ihrami ntepul nohora repar lerni yoma repar lerni de nodi wniaror warwuaru dom owa'an to ' a . Ler di nodi oleka mehra-maunu pa twaror nohora .
Do n't judge , so that you wo n't be judged . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yana plet pa mpiaghala rimormior wialmi totpena Uplerlawna mana edonna Nhudi-npar Nukmua wali miy .
For with whatever judgment you judge , you will be judged , and with whatever measure you measure , it will be measured to you . ||| Yoma la ' emkameni la miwerta-mitailia riy doma demade Uplerlawna Nawerta-nataili miy emkade wali . Ne nhio'ota-liewta maka itnairia pa ta talewta it rimormior wialli demade Uplerlawna Nal hade pa na Nlewat wali ita .
Why do you see the speck that is in your brother 's eye , but do n't consider the beam that is in your own eye ? ||| Hya ' mak karei pia mpiaghala rimormior wialmi onnila do'oni-halli mak edon kwerta , mere miy do'omi-halmi re nekane lawan rehia . La'pa mhi ' emkade , de emekwalima miy e mimkek nana ai liu'wu mak kdella mutwualmi de matni ralamni , ne ai dieulu naniewat la miy mat wamueheni ralamni mere miy edonna mimkek nana .
Or how will you tell your brother , ‘ Let me remove the speck from your eye , ' and behold , the beam is in your own eye ? ||| Ralma-riormi emkameni pa mikot la mutwualmi miwra , Mai pia agal doinia ai liu'wu mak kden la o matmu de , mere miplin niek la ai dieulu de e naniewat la orgahami matmi ralamni ? !
You hypocrite ! First remove the beam out of your own eye , and then you can see clearly to remove the speck out of your brother 's eye . ||| Hoi ! Yana mtiota miy inonmi la riy kalwiedweda mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Milgot ulga ai dieulu mak kden la miy matmi de totpena mimkek samomuoga ai liu'wu mak kden la mutwualmi de matni pa milgota .
Do n't give that which is holy to the dogs , neither throw your pearls before the pigs , lest perhaps they trample them under their feet , and turn and tear you to pieces . ||| Yana miala hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna gahani la ' a riy mak kahmen memna kreiniana . Yoma itsi ' emkade , de emolmolan nekama itala yamanna la ahu na'ana de hota ah die nwaldioinia pa ntowr ita . Ne emolmolan nek wali me tnaklia mutiara la wawi gaini noka hota nwatei-nwahapra mutiara de .
Ask , and it will be given you . Seek , and you will find . Knock , and it will be opened for you . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa mpiak la Uplerlawna , hota mliernana , mpiahaka , de hota mia ' nana , mtiet la nhiari hota rhari nhiari tiy miy . La ' hade pede mipe'el pa mpiak rer lia Uplerlawna .
For everyone who asks receives . He who seeks finds . To him who knocks it will be opened . ||| Yoma riy mak kwaka de hota nlernana , mak kwahaka hota na ' nana me riy maka ktet la nhiari de hota rhari nhiari la .
Or who is there among you who , if his son asks him for bread , will give him a stone ? ||| La ' miy hononmi re , de la'pa ama-hyali id a'nani nwak yamanna la amni , dewade amni nal watu lia e ' a ? !
Or if he asks for a fish , who will give him a serpent ? ||| Onde la'pa nwak i'na dewade amni nal niy lia e ' a ? !
If you then , being evil , know how to give good gifts to your children , how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him ! ||| La'pa rimormiori miy maka khi'inde khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala nekane miatu miala ha samomuounu la miy a'nami re , yaho'ma miy Amlawanmi mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Hota E ' ed mak kalkal reria ha samomuou lia ' a riy mak kwak la E ' a .
Therefore , whatever you desire for men to do to you , you shall also do to them , for this is the law and the prophets . ||| La ' a hya'-hya ' a honona de mhi ' samomuou rira de emekwalima mimiwra irhi ' samomuou tiy miy . Hade de Musa deullu-tatarni me makwohorulu-ktatrulu ha rwatutu-rwaye ' a ononni .
Enter in by the narrow gate , for the gate is wide and the way is broad that leads to destruction , and there are many who enter in by it . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la mormiormi ralamni de mliola nhiar miaka kakmamah ' a pa mlia'awa la mormiori-dardiari genni . Yana mliola talan mak kawerna-katpoini , yoma nhiar die ed maka tlol pa tla'awa ai mormiori ralamni naraka . Ne riy rwakdie'da lola .
How narrow is the gate and the way is restricted that leads to life ! There are few who find it . ||| Mere talan lihir maka itlola pa itla'awa mormiori-dardiari genni de nhiarni nakmamah ' a rehia pa nhi'nande riy doma rmeh ' a mak kla ' nana .
Beware of false prophets , who come to you in sheep 's clothing , but inwardly are ravening wolves . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mi'ererma la riy mak ktot pa khi ' inonni la emolmolla mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Hota rmai miy die rwehwa-rlakta emeka duma , mere erammi , ohpora-ahdiawra irhatta .
By their fruits you will know them . Do you gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles ? ||| Hota la ' a wniehwani-liakatni nekane miy e miat niohora ira kniarni plolli-halli . Itala au nor wo'oni pa tsi ' a la yawalliohora . Ruwnu-penta de edon nawo ' a lokrahi wio ' a , ne ruwnu-ahla rurni-karkiaratni , de edonna tlernana kar wo ' a .
Even so , every good tree produces good fruit , but the corrupt tree produces evil fruit . ||| La ' a au muaka kpoti-kadwu de tlernana orwo ' a-auwo ' samomuou , ne la ' a ora-au muaka khoptutu-khoplera de itlernana wo ' maka kilta-kwatra .
A good tree ca n't produce evil fruit , neither can a corrupt tree produce good fruit . ||| Au muaka kpoti-kadwu , de edonna nawo ' a kilkilta-kwatwatra ne au muaka khoptutu-khoplera edonna na'unu-nayeh nohora wo ' samomuou .
Every tree that does n't grow good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire . ||| Ne orona-augona maka edonna ka'unu-kayeha , de hota retan doinia pa rnaklia la ai ralamni .
Therefore by their fruits you will know them . ||| Ora-au re emekwalima mak ktot pa khi ' inonni de emeknekama mak kakot nohor Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Hota la ' ira wniehwani nekane miy e miat niohora ir kniarni plolli-halli .
Not everyone who says to me , ‘ Lord , Lord , ' will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven , but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven . ||| Riy harahu makpolu-makwak la A na'nu riwra , Matromlawna , Orgahi-Orha ' u ne ! Mere hota riy doma rmeh ' a to ' a mak rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka Enodi plolli la emeka ir Rayni . Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re eneknek to'ama riy meni maka klernohora A A'mu mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha ralma-riorni .
Many will tell me in that day , ‘ Lord , Lord , did n't we prophesy in your name , in your name cast out demons , and in your name do many mighty works ? ' ||| Ne la'pa nte'ela A maimia'yu la re'eni wornu pa Aghudi-puar rimormiori de hota rira liawanni maka edonna katlina-katailla Uplerlawna rakot mai A ' u riwra , Matroma , O edonna Mutlin ma'ta amodia O nanmu pa ma makot nohora Uplerlawna nnio'oni-niatnu ? Ne la ' walia ami e mpet walia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni pa ma mhokar doinia hegana-kawnu , me totpena amtutga hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat .
Then I will tell them , ‘ I never knew you . Depart from me , you who work iniquity . ' ||| Mere hota Awualola plele'er la giwra , A ' g e uplin niohora miy ee ! Rho'orgot miy la handi ! Miy er maka khi ' a yatyatni-halalli !
Everyone therefore who hears these words of mine and does them , I will liken him to a wise man who built his house on the rock . ||| Pede la'pa riy ratlin nana A li'ru ri pa hota rlernohora , de ir emekwalima riy mak katu kwatatga romni rirni la watu wawannu .
The rain came down , the floods came , and the winds blew and beat on that house , and it did n't fall , for it was founded on the rock . ||| La'pa otna nturu-anni nten pia nmai die nodia ihini-turnu pa nwayotil la rom de , mere rom de hota edonna nwalera yoma nawniatat lia watu wawannu .
Everyone who hears these words of mine and does n't do them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand . ||| Ne la'pa he ' ed maka katlina A li'ru maka ukota ri , mere edonna nlernohora de emeknekama riy mak kpodku-kpadku maka kariria nek romni la eni wawannu .
The rain came down , the floods came , and the winds blew and beat on that house , and it fell-and its fall was great . ||| La'pa nmai wia otna lerni de hota nodia anin lawna nor wut nieka ihini-turnu pa la'pa nwayotil la rom de , de hota rom de napru'wu la yawa , me rirni-awnu kdieulu-kliatna .
When Jesus had finished saying these things , the multitudes were astonished at his teaching , ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nwati kniarni la wniatutnu-wniaye'eni re , ne rirahu mak kden la hande , rwer rer wiawni la ' a wniatutnu-wniaye'eni re ,
for he taught them with authority , and not like the scribes . ||| yoma Nodi plolli pa Nwatutu . Pede wniatutnu de ematia ' a makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama Yahudi wniatutnu .
When he came down from the mountain , great multitudes followed him . ||| La'pa Yesus Nerun la wo'ora hananni , ne riy rahu rlernohora reria .
Behold , a leper came to him and worshiped him , saying , Lord , if you want to , you can make me clean . ||| La ' ler de nekpa riy mak kanieni ulityata-temyata nmai noma nwaltior tar lia Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama nwak la niwra , Amee ! Mtiulan mai a ' u . Agat niohora de Omuodi plolli pa Mhi ' kalwied nan a ' u , hornama Ompuayow nohora a wakwa'ku , up matro'mu nee !
Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him , saying , I want to . Be made clean . Immediately his leprosy was cleansed . ||| Noma Yesus Nran limni pa Nteman la riy de , pa Nakot la , Arieiniana o wakwakmu pa omkialwied wa ! Mtatande nekpa nnienni de nmolu .
Jesus said to him , See that you tell nobody , but go , show yourself to the priest , and offer the gift that Moses commanded , as a testimony to them . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Mhuoratreria ! Yana mukot harilla ' riy dom owa'ana . Mere mliernohora hya ' maka Musa ha ne'era-ntatar targ oleka , de mlia ' a imam ida pa mpuak la totpena namkek memna de omkialwied olekwa . Me muala limtutnu emeka Musa nwatut tiarg oleka de totpa riy honona rat niohora de omkialwied olek wa .
When he came into Capernaum , a centurion came to him , asking him for help , ||| La ' noma Yesus Nler la Kapernaum , noma o'ta-mat la makodi keki-rautu rahu ida nma nwatroma , pa nwaka tniulan la pa nhi ' kalwied nana e hopopanni mak kamehra la roma nayanni .
saying , Lord , my servant lies in the house paralyzed , grievously tormented . ||| Perwira Roma nakot la Yesus Niwra , Ame ! A hopopnu id la roma nayanni e naliu'ut nohora mehrani la ' a genni .
Jesus said to him , I will come and heal him . ||| Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hyalia , pen Atiy pia ghi ' kalwieda ha nnienni della rommu nayanni .
The centurion answered , Lord , I 'm not worthy for you to come under my roof . Just say the word , and my servant will be healed . ||| Yan nek wa Tuna ! Perwira id a ' u mere a ' g edon lia ' nana Tuna lewatni pa Tuna Nmai lia a ro'mu nayanni . Pen neka Tuna Nden nek la handi mere Nodi plolli pa Nhopna a hopopnu de nkalwieda la roma nayanni .
For I am also a man under authority , having under myself soldiers . I tell this one , ‘ Go , ' and he goes , and tell another , ‘ Come , ' and he comes , and tell my servant , ‘ Do this , ' and he does it . ||| Yoma a ' niek de utlin la mak kodi plolli mai a ' u . Ne la ' a a tniornu de ratlin mai a ' u . Aghopan pa makodi keki-rautu ida nla'awa de hota nler pa nla'awa . Apuolga dom de , hota rmai . Ne la ' walia aghopan pa a hopopnu de nhi ' hya ' to ' a , de hota nlernohora .
When Jesus heard it , he marveled and said to those who followed , Most certainly I tell you , I have n't found so great a faith , not even in Israel . ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin nana ha lirni de , noma Yesus Nwer rer wiawni yoma makodi keki-rautu o'tani de pesiayni de . Noma Yesus Nakot la mutlialawna maka e rlernohor E ' a Niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , riy di de riy Israel atia ' a id walia di me ! Mpiesiaya ! La ' a riy Israel maka Awuatrom nan oleka re de A ' g edonna liernan ma'ta maka pesiayni naruri emeka riy mak Israel atia ' di !
I tell you that many will come from the east and the west , and will sit down with Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven , ||| Plola rirahu mak edon rwatiawu Israel mere rwatiawu tipru , warta pa rmai die , hota rora Abraham , Isak me Yakop rewre'wa pa ramuki-rahepru la ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna la gen miaka Uplerlawna Ntorna-nraut de !
but the children of the Kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness . There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ||| Mere makden Israel re , maka Uplerlawna Ntutga la ululu pa hota rre ' teman la Uplerlawna horatni-hairni limni-rorni , de harahu re hota ema rwaldioinia pa rnaklia la melmelli-kalkalamni , la ' a Uplerlawna genni de walli tio'ora . Hota la ' hande de rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni .
Jesus said to the centurion , Go your way . Let it be done for you as you have believed . His servant was healed in that hour . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la perwir de , Mlia ' a nek wa ! Hya ' ed maka ompuesiay die pen mumkek memna . La ' a mtatan de nekpa perwir de hopopanni nkalwied wa .
When Jesus came into Peter 's house , he saw his wife 's mother lying sick with a fever . ||| Noma Yesus Nokria Petrus likatni . La ' hande de Yesus Namkek de Petrus yananni ruru npahna nohora tema pniahnani la ' a lewu wawannu .
He touched her hand , and the fever left her . So she got up and served him . ||| Noma Yesus Nteman la patke ' de limni , dewade nnienni de nmolu . Noma namat pa nwahi ' a-nwayodia ya'ana-yemnu pa Yesus Na'ana .
When evening came , they brought to him many possessed with demons . He cast out the spirits with a word , and healed all who were sick , ||| La'pa lera ntuinia , dewade riy rmai die rodia rirahu maka hegana nhu'ru ralma . Noma Yesus Nhopan pa hegana-kawnu re rlergot la re , me Nhi ' a riy honona pa rkalwied la nnienni-nhienni .
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet , saying , He took our infirmities and bore our diseases . ||| Hya ' maka Yesus Nhi ' nana re honona de ntutga de makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya lirni naplola . Yoma Yesaya nhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni emkadille , E ' ed mak kolin doin ita mehrani-maunu . Ne Nal it pa tkalwieda .
Now when Jesus saw great multitudes around him , he gave the order to depart to the other side . ||| La lera ida ne rirahu rle'lu nana Yesus pede Yesus Nhopan pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwahi ' pa rleretia danau .
A scribe came and said to him , Teacher , I will follow you wherever you go . ||| Yesus edon la ' ma'ta , dewade makwatutu-kwaye ' a Musa deullu-tatarni ida nmai pia nakot la niwra , Am tungkurge , a ' g e giwra liernohor rer nek O ' Ama pa tlol meni-meni .
Jesus said to him , The foxes have holes and the birds of the sky have nests , but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hyalia , Ohpora-ahdiawra hu'ulli-lienni erla , me onu-ma'nu nekane puonni erla , mere Rimormiori A'na A ' u , A ' die hota A ' g edon liernan gen pia A'udera A o'tu . Ne hota omliernohor A ' die hota o e mukleh wali geni .
Another of his disciples said to him , Lord , allow me first to go and bury my father . ||| Noma mak klernohor reria E ' a id nakot wal lia , Tuna , Muolin doin a ' pua ula ' ulia la'pa arie'ela tiamnia a'mu nampena aliernohor reri O ' a .
But Jesus said to him , Follow me , and leave the dead to bury their own dead . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la , Hyalia , dodo'ondi de mliernohor reri A ' u niek wa ne muolin doinia riy mak edon kpesiay A ' u pede emekneka rmati olekwa pa orgahani rtamnia mak kmati re .
When he got into a boat , his disciples followed him . ||| La'pa Yesus Nha'at la puou , noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ror wali noma rhopal wa .
Behold , a violent storm came up on the sea , so much that the boat was covered with the waves , but he was asleep . ||| Noma plinu-plinnianamde anin lawna mak kodia kakmoranni nten pia nhi'nande nayo'ora la ' danau pa yo'or mana rriw lia puou ralamni . Emkade ho'mana Yesus e nanin hala la puou ralamni .
The disciples came to him and woke him up , saying , Save us , Lord ! We are dying ! ||| Dewade maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rla ' pa ramat doin Yesus riwra , Tuna , Mtiulan mai ita , hota puou di ntepar wa ! Hota itmat wie !
He said to them , Why are you fearful , O you of little faith ? Then he got up , rebuked the wind and the sea , and there was a great calm . ||| Yesus Niwra , Nihya'pa mimta'at wenanmi emkadena ? ! Miy edonna mpiesiay A ' u . Dewade Yesus Namat pa Nkamot targa yo'ora-anin lawan de na'nama nleretniekla nalina-nalera la ' a danau de ralamni .
The men marveled , saying , What kind of man is this , that even the wind and the sea obey him ? ||| Dewade maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re honona rwer rer wiawni pa riwra , Riy meni hadina de pa yo'ora-anni nek de ratlina-ratailla ?
When he came to the other side , into the country of the Gergesenes , two people possessed by demons met him there , coming out of the tombs , exceedingly fierce , so that nobody could pass that way . ||| La'pa Yesus Nte'ela danau walli , la ' a Gadara yapatni , noma riy woru maka yatni-rha'ani rhu'ru ralma rmai pia rwatroma Yesus . Riy maroro ' a re rawuwuhura , nhi'nande riy ramta'ata rlol hare onni . Rrora rlergot la hu'ula-liena la ' a tniamin mat geni ralamni pa
Behold , they cried out , saying , What do we have to do with you , Jesus , Son of God ? Have you come here to torment us before the time ? ||| rpolpuolu-rhawaunia pa riwra , Oi , Uplerlawna A'nani nee ! Hota Omhi ' nan ami emkameni ee ! Yanhi'pa Omiwra Mukmua ami , mere lerni edonna ntutu-nte ' ma'ta pa Uplerlawna Nhudi-npar ami .
Now there was a herd of many pigs feeding far away from them . ||| Gen di edon oliet la wawi wiok lawna mak kwayowar pa kahaka ya'ana-yemannu .
The demons begged him , saying , If you cast us out , permit us to go away into the herd of pigs . ||| Noma yatni-rha'ani re rwak lilili-mamuau lia Yesus pa riwra , La'pa Omulgot am die , ampak pa Mhuopan pa am mhu'ru ralam la ' a wawi re .
He said to them , Go ! They came out and went into the herd of pigs , and behold , the whole herd of pigs rushed down the cliff into the sea and died in the water . ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Mlia'awa ! Dewade yatni-rha'ani re rlergot la ' a riy maroro ' a re inonni , pa rla ' rhu'ru ralma wawi re , na'nama wawi honona re rawlar pia rla rlererun la weran teti pa rwuwul wenwenna la ' danau de ralamni .
Those who fed them fled and went away into the city and told everything , including what happened to those who were possessed with demons . ||| Mak khuri-kwa'ana wawi re rawlar pia rla rakot nohora wawi re rora riy maroro ' a re la leta ralamni .
Behold , all the city came out to meet Jesus . When they saw him , they begged that he would depart from their borders . ||| Ha narieiniande riy honona la let de ralamni rla rwahaka Yesus pa rora rwatrom memna . Noma rwak lilili-mamuau pua Yesus yan memmemna Nalo'on la ' gen die ne plet pa Nwaran nek wa .
He entered into a boat and crossed over , and came into his own city . ||| Noma Yesus Nha'at la puou na'nama rleretia danau pa rawal lia E letni-ruhunni .
Behold , they brought to him a man who was paralyzed , lying on a bed . Jesus , seeing their faith , said to the paralytic , Son , cheer up ! Your sins are forgiven you . ||| La hande , riy rodia mak kaliu'uta ida de rran nan wut tio ' a la u'tani maka nanin la pa rodia la Yesus de . La'pa Yesus Namkek tutga riy mak kmai re pesiayni raruri , noma Yesus Nakot la riy mak kaliu'ut de Niwra , Yana mumta'ata ama ! Dodo'ondi de A'umou-uwitn oleka do'omu-halmu .
Behold , some of the scribes said to themselves , This man blasphemes . ||| Makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama dom mak kden la hande rwaror E ' de rimormior niek E ' wa pa rwaror la ralamni de riwra , Inee ! La'pa Enakot emkade de , riy de e Napolu-naliella Uplerlawna yoma Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nodi plolli pa Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli !
Jesus , knowing their thoughts , said , Why do you think evil in your hearts ? ||| Mere ira ralma-riorni re , Yesus Nat niohora momuoga , pede Nakot la , Ee , hya ' ed mak kariei pia mimpiaror nana ralma yatyata-halal dena ? !
For which is easier , to say , ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or to say , ‘ Get up , and walk ' ? ||| La'pa plet pa A'ukot nek la e ' a giwra e do'oni-halli ramou-rawitn oleka de , miplin niohor ma'ta plollola pa e do'oni-halli ramou-rawitn oleka me edonna , mere la'pa Apuaran pia A'ukot la e ' pa namat pa nala'awa de mimiat niohor memna A ru'ru-la'yu etla yoma mimkek nan memna .
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins- then he said to the paralytic , Get up , and take up your mat , and go to your house . ||| Pede hota la ' dodo'ondi de Agiwra tiut muemna tiy miy , la ' a noh di wawannu de Rimormiori A'nani A ' g ed mak kodi plolli pa umou-uwitna riy do'oni-halli . Noma Yesus Nakot la mak kaliu'ut de Niwra , Hyalia , mumat doin la pa mpuopna u'tamu de pa mlia'awa rommu .
He arose and departed to his house . ||| Dewade mak kaliu'ut de namat doin pa nla'awa la romni nayanni .
But when the multitudes saw it , they marveled and glorified God , who had given such authority to men . ||| La'pa riy rahu re ramkek memna hihi ' a-yapyap die noma honona rwer rer wiawni , ne ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna yoma Uplerlawna Nal oleka plolli-mneheni mak emkadi la rimormiori mak kdella nohkerna wawannu .
As Jesus passed by from there , he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax collection office . He said to him , Follow me . He got up and followed him . ||| La ' noma Yesus Nhoitio'or la gen diewa . La'pa Yesus Nalala ' rer mia'ta noma Namkek nana mak kawoka blastena id de nanni Matius . La ' ler de de Matius e namtatna la gen miaka nhi'inde enawoka blasten la . Noma Yesus Npol lia , E ! Mua mliernohor A ' g ee ! Noma Matius naprir pia nlernohora Yesus .
As he sat in the house , behold , many tax collectors and sinners came and sat down with Jesus and his disciples . ||| La'pa Yesus e Nana'an rer lia Matius romni dewade riy harahu maka nhi'inde leta mniotni sukni atia'ala re , emeka mak kawoka blastena me riy mak ha riwra riy dodo ' a-halala rmai pia rora Yesus me maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa ra'an rewre'wa .
When the Pharisees saw it , they said to his disciples , Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners ? ||| Riy Parisi mana ramkek wali hare . Noma ratiana riy maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riwra , Oi ! Nihya'pa miy tungkurmi de Nora mak kawoka blastena , ror wutga mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala dom to ' a re ra'an wutu ? !
When Jesus heard it , he said to them , Those who are healthy have no need for a physician , but those who are sick do . ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin nana yatianni re noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mak edonna kanieni edonna rma rwahaka dokter . Eneknek to ' a mak kamehra nanpena ed mak kwahaka dokter .
But you go and learn what this means , ‘ I desire mercy , and not sacrifice , ' for I came not to call the righteous , but sinners to repentance . ||| Mpiaror kalwiedweda Puka lirni makden la tatar di , Rimormiori maka ktutga ralam kalwiedni la rimormior wialli khi ' A ralmu pa uhepru de nareh dioin meman la riy mak kala prehenni-maunu mai A ' u . Yoma A maimia'yu di de A ' g e edonna mua puolga riy mak kiwra irakleha do ' a-hala , mere Amuai di totpa Apuolga riy dodo ' a-halala pa rhoitio'or doini do'oni-halli re .
Then John 's disciples came to him , saying , Why do we and the Pharisees fast often , but your disciples do n't fast ? ||| La'pa nhorwua noma lera ida ne mak klernohora Yohansi mak kharani rmai lia Yesus pa ratiana riwra , Nihya'pa amora riy Parisi re matahan lara puasa , ne mak klernohora Tuna de ra'ana ?
Jesus said to them , Can the friends of the bridegroom mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them ? But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them , and then they will fast . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Emkameni la miy wniarormi dena de ? ! A ' di de emeknekama muanke ' a mak kiwra kmehlima . Riy maka rpol niana-rwak nana pa ra'ana-remun la yawoka-yale ' u la mehlima-marya ' a , de hota ralamni edonna rmolu-rhelam nohora muanke ' maka kmehlima mak ktepartar mua't la ya'ana la ' mei wawannu toh ! Hade yala'ani atia ' hade ! Mere hota la'pa nte'ela la ' lerni , nanpena ira'ala muanke ' a maka kmehlim della mak ka'an wutu re onni . La ' ler de nampena iratahan lara .
No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment , for the patch would tear away from the garment , and a worse hole is made . ||| Riy edonna rga ' pua rala kokanan warwuaru ra rlowna rain mak kawniali . Yoma kokanan warwuar die hota napliu'uta-napdiedan nana rain mak kawnial de ne hota na'itar la pritni .
Neither do people put new wine into old wineskins , or else the skins would burst , and the wine be spilled , and the skins ruined . No , they put new wine into fresh wineskins , and both are preserved . ||| Emkade wal lia riy edonna rga ' pua rhuria anggur turu warwuarnu la ' ha ulit mak mahneka . Yoma hota ulit mak emkade de hota npah ' a pa ntowur doinia anggur tur diella me ulit de ho'mana ta'en niana rnair owa'ana . Anggur tur warwuarnu de rhuria la ha ulit warwuaru totpena rrora yana riata .
While he told these things to them , behold , a ruler came and worshiped him , saying , My daughter has just died , but come and lay your hand on her , and she will live . ||| La'pa Yesus Nora mak klernohor reri Yohansi mak kharani e rwahagaur reri , o'ta-mata ida nmai pia nwaltior tar lia Yesus gaini ralamni . Na'nama nakot la Yesus , Tuna , a a'nu patke ' a na'nama nmati . Mere awuak de , Mtiulan pa Mlia Mtieman la e ' a totpena nmori owa'ana .
Jesus got up and followed him , as did his disciples . ||| Noma Yesus Naprir dioin la pa Nor rewre'wa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rora riy mak kpol die pa rla'awa .
Behold , a woman who had a discharge of blood for twelve years came behind him , and touched the fringe of his garment , for she said within herself , If I just touch his garment , I will be made well . ||| Rla ' pa rden ma'ta la talla letgarni , dewade patke ' a mak khur riara la ' a anni termida wehrani woru , nma nlernohora Yesus . Nwaror la ralamni , Hornama atieman to'ola raini plalahwani de , de hota akalwied wa . Noma nlol Yesus to'orni pa na'nama nteman la Yesus raini plalahwani de tawnu .
But Jesus , turning around and seeing her , said , Daughter , cheer up ! Your faith has made you well . And the woman was made well from that hour . ||| Dewade Yesus Nkillia patke ' de pa Nakot la , Yan mumta'ata . O pesiaymu e narur mai A ' u ina , pa mkialwied wa ! Mtatande nekpa nnienni nmolu .
When Jesus came into the ruler 's house and saw the flute players and the crowd in noisy disorder , ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nodi liarni la o'ta-mat de romni . La'pa Namkek nan mak keu floiti , me riy rahu mak ko ' a-kakur nohora mat die , noma
he said to them , Make room , because the girl is n't dead , but sleeping . They were ridiculing him . ||| Yesus Nakot la re , Ee , hononmi mliergota ! Yoma hararar de edonna nmati , hade e nanin to ' a . La'pa ratlin nana Yesus lirni de , noma honona riarin taru la yamalli .
But when the crowd was sent out , he entered in , took her by the hand , and the girl arose . ||| La'pa honona re rlergot wa onnila Yesus nhiopanni dewade Yesus Nla'awa hararar de genni la ' a rialma , na'nama na Ntorreria hararar de limni dewade nleretniekla nmori owa'an wa .
The report of this went out into all that land . ||| Nhor diewade riy rla ' pa rodia kot della leta-leta la Galilea uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani honona .
As Jesus passed by from there , two blind men followed him , calling out and saying , Have mercy on us , son of David ! ||| La'pa Yesus Nto'or la gen die , pa Nalala ' reri ne riy mak matni kyata worga e rlernohora reria Yesus . Rrora rhaun la Yesus riwra , Ray Daud upni-a'nani ne ! Mtiulla-msiayn nan mai ami ee !
When he had come into the house , the blind men came to him . Jesus said to them , Do you believe that I am able to do this ? They told him , Yes , Lord . ||| La'pa Yesus Nte'ela roma ralamni dewade rrora rmai pia rwatroma Yesus . Noma Yesus Natiana re , Mimpiesiaya de hota Aghi ' kalwied miy matyatmi rena ? Noma rrora rwahla Yesus lirni , Ampesiay O ' Tuna !
Then he touched their eyes , saying , According to your faith be it done to you . ||| Dewade Yesus Nteman la rrora matni . Nakot la re Niwra , Yoma la ' miy pesiaymi pa hya ' ed maka ha mihaka de hota mliernana .
Then their eyes were opened . Jesus strictly commanded them , saying , See that no one knows about this . ||| Nleretniekla matni re ramkek wa . Noma Yesus Nano ' a re Niwra , Mhioratrer memieheni memna A nnio ' u di . Mlia ' pa yan mikotkot harilla ' he ' to ' a .
But they went out and spread abroad his fame in all that land . ||| Mere ir edon ratlin la lirni de mere rla'awa , pa rwahaur nohor momuoga re la ' a leta-ruhuna la Galilea uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani honona .
As they went out , behold , a mute man who was demon possessed was brought to him . ||| La'pa riy maroro ' a re rlergot pa riwra rla'awa dewade riy rodia riy maka hegana-kawnu nhu'ru ralma id pa rmai lia Yesus . Riy de naplinu naltieri .
When the demon was cast out , the mute man spoke . The multitudes marveled , saying , Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel ! ||| Yesus Nleretniekla Nhokar doinia hegana-kawnu de , ne mtatande nekpa riy de naltier kalwiedwed wa . Riy honona rwer rer wiawni pa riwra , La ' a mormior miamni di , de ami edon mamkek ma'ta hihi ' a-yapyap mak emkadi la ' a Israel di .
But the Pharisees said , By the prince of the demons , he casts out demons . ||| Mere riy Parisi riwra , Hegana amlawanni ed mak kala ruri-lai la Hade pede na Nhokra-nlai hegana-kawnu re .
Jesus went about all the cities and the villages , teaching in their synagogues and preaching the Good News of the Kingdom , and healing every disease and every sickness among the people . ||| Emkade mamain nek la Yesus Nla ' pa Nler la leta-leta re honona . Nwatutu-nwaye ' la ' a roma-lewu miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli , me Nakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota de hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli emeka Ray . Enhi ' kalwieda rirahu maka klernana nnieni-nhiena , mehra-mau hya ' a-hya ' a to ' a .
But when he saw the multitudes , he was moved with compassion for them because they were harassed and scattered , like sheep without a shepherd . ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek la rirahu re , de Yesus ralamni ntuin doin la pa Niwra Ntulan la ira . Yoma honona re meh ' a nalerlera , yoma rakleha riy mak ktutga talla mak kaplollol la ' ira . Honona re emolmolla pipi-duma mak kakleha riy mak kodi .
Then he said to his disciples , The harvest indeed is plentiful , but the laborers are few . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la talanwalli maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , Nnairia yawalliohora id pa Niwra , Emolmolan nekama wetra ' harahu maka nkern olek la nhyi ' ralma , mere mak kreiki-kwo'ora , edonna rtu'tu , emkade walia mak edon katlin ma'ta Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni de harahu wali mere mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni riy doma rmeh ' a .
Pray therefore that the Lord of the harvest will send out laborers into his harvest . ||| La ' hade pede emolmolan nekama rwak la ora nhyi ' de totpena nhopna mak kreiki-kwo'ora pa rla rreiki-rwo'ora , mpiak wal lia Uplerlawna totpena Ntutga riy pa rre'ela rakot nohora Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni la rimormiori mak edon katlin ma'ta .
He called to himself his twelve disciples , and gave them authority over unclean spirits , to cast them out , and to heal every disease and every sickness . ||| Nla ' pa nte'ela lera ida , noma Yesus Npol wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riy termida wehrani woru . Noma Yesus orgahani Nala ruri-lai la ir honona totpena rnairia pa ra rhokra-rlaiya hegana-kawnu me la ' walia totpena ra rhi ' kalwieda mak kler la nnieni-nhiena mehra-mau honona .
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these . The first , Simon , who is called Peter , Andrew , his brother , James the son of Zebedee , John , his brother , ||| Riy maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re maka Enhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni de , riy termida wehrani woru . Hare nanni de , Simon maka ha rpol wual lia Petrus , nor walia hyalli Andarias , me Sebedeus a'nani Yakowsi nor hyalli Yohansi ,
Philip , Bartholomew , Thomas , Matthew the tax collector , James the son of Alphaeus , Lebbaeus , who was also called Thaddaeus , ||| ra'itra Pilipsu , nora Bartolomeus me Tomsa me Matiusu maka kawoka blastena , me Yakowsi , Alpius a'nani , me Tadeus ,
Simon the Zealot , and Judas Iscariot , who also betrayed him . ||| la'pa Simon mak kwayotil memna Romawi rodi plolli la Israel , la'pa Yudas Iskariot mak ka'olga Yesus .
Jesus sent these twelve out and commanded them , saying , Do n't go among the Gentiles , and do n't enter into any city of the Samaritans . ||| Riy termida wehrani woru mak kodia Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni re , Yesus Nhopn ir pa rhi ' a hya ' a maka Ha Nakota ri , de Niwra , Hyal miy re ! Yana mlia ' a riy maka edon kdella Yahudi genni , me yana mlia ' wal lia riy Samaria genni-tienni .
Rather , go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel . ||| Mere mlia ' riy Israel re . Yoma Israel rwaltio'or doin olek Uplerlawna pa emolmolan nekama duma mak kawlar dioin oleka la ' a matromni .
As you go , preach , saying , ‘ The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand ! ' ||| Mikot la re miwra edon nalo'on wali ne lerni ntutu-nte'ewa pa Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka Ray ida .
Heal the sick , cleanse the lepers , and cast out demons . Freely you received , so freely give . ||| Mhi ' kalwieda riy mak kamehra-kamau , mimoria riy mak kmati-kmolu , mhi ' kalwieda riy maka kanienia ulityata-temyata me mhiokra-mliai dioinia hegana-kawnu . Miy edon mial hadomdom pa mliernan ruri-lai die , mere Uplerlawna ed mak kal nek rurni-laini honona tiy miy . Pede , la emkade walia mtiulan la rimormiori wialmi , de yana mhiopan pa rala miy kaimi .
Do n't take any gold , silver , or brass in your money belts . ||| Yana ma miodia kupan maha , kupan wawahra , onde kupan pi'ra .
Take no bag for your journey , neither two coats , nor sandals , nor staff , for the laborer is worthy of his food . ||| Yan miod walia arkai onde naniayarmi ida-woru onde laka wniopmi woru totpena mhiernu la ' talan ralma . Ne yan miod walia lie'enmi . Yoma riy mak kar lia Uplerlawna kniarni de rlernan liwatnu-odawni nhierannu la ' a riy maka e rhima-rre ' reria .
Into whatever city or village you enter , find out who in it is worthy , and stay there until you go on . ||| La'pa mtie'ela leta-ruhuna dom de mihak nana riy maka enreinian miy pia mpiak la pa miora mhiol wiutu . Mdien neka la ir romni la'pa kniarmi la ' let de la nhorwua nanpena mpiaran la ' rom de
As you enter into the household , greet it . ||| La'pa mtie'ela romni nayanni de mpiak pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala kalwieda-paitiot la .
If the household is worthy , let your peace come on it , but if it is n't worthy , let your peace return to you . ||| La'pa rom de mniotni rreinian miy die hota plola pa hota rlernan Uplerlawna kalwiedni-paitiotni . Mere la'pa edonna rreinian miy die , mhiedg owa'an lirmi re maka mpiaka Uplerlawna Nhima-nre ' ira .
Whoever does n't receive you or hear your words , as you go out of that house or that city , shake the dust off your feet . ||| La'pa mlier la roma-lewu onde leta-ruhuna maka edonna kreinian miy onde edonna katlina-katail tiy miy die mtio'or doin gen die , me mkiakan doinia awu mak kden la lakmi lia'armi totpa mtiutga de Uplerlawna Nwayotlia ira .
Most certainly I tell you , it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city . ||| Mhioratreria ! La'pa nte'ela ' lera-mela hohoni maka Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni-tatiaili lahannu , de riy mak kden la leta-ruhuna maka edon kreinian miy er maka klernana Uplerlawna niukamnu mak kareh dioin miemna niukamnu maka riy yatyata-halala mak kden la leta Sodom nora Gomora hota rlernana .
Behold , I send you out as sheep among wolves . Therefore be wise as serpents and harmless as doves . ||| Mhioratrer hadi ! A ' g e ghopan pa mlia'awa A arwa'lu geni pede hota miy die emeknekama pipi-duma mak kakleh ruri-lai pia mlier tar lia ohpora-ahdiawra letgarni mak kiwra klihir matmata-khaw riarara . Pede erammi la ' temmi pa emeknekama niy , me mtiutga nhioli samomuou emeknekama lmo'ma maru .
But beware of men , for they will deliver you up to councils , and in their synagogues they will scourge you . ||| Mi'ererma yoma hota riy mak edon kpesiay re rte'la miy pia rod miy lia mak khudi-kpara gaini . Hota rliwar miy lia ' roma-lewu miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la .
Yes , and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake , for a testimony to them and to the nations . ||| Ne hota ra'it miy lia ' a o'ta-mat lalawna me la ' a ray-ray re gaini ralamni yoma la ' A rerie'yu . Hota emkade totpena mimliernan talan pa mikot nohor Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ira , ne la ' walia totpena mak kaplin niohor Uplerlawna re ratlin nan A na'nu .
But when they deliver you up , do n't be anxious how or what you will say , for it will be given you in that hour what you will say . For it is not you who speak , but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you . ||| Mere la'pa rod miy pia rhudi-rpar miy , de yan memmemna ihrami rteplu yoma mpiarora hya ' maka hota miy mikota ? Yoma hota la'pa ha ratian miy nanpena miy Amlawanmi Uplerlawna Nal miy pia miat nohora hya ' ed maka ha mikota de . Yoma hya ' mak ha mikota de edon nwatiawua miy wniaror wamuehemi , mere ha nwatiawu Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
Brother will deliver up brother to death , and the father his child . Children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to death . ||| Hota la ' ler de riy rala inni-narni makpesiay A ' u pa rwenna . Emkade wal lia ama nek de nala a'nani makpesiay pa rwenna . Me upa-a'na nek de hota edon ratlin la inni-amni makpesiay pede rala inni-amni pa riy rwunu-rwenna .
You will be hated by all men for my name 's sake , but he who endures to the end will be saved . ||| Riy la ' meni-meni to ' a hota rahankeran rer tiy miy yoma miy mliernohor reri A ' u . Mere la'pa he ' ed maka ktorrer pitpitga pesiayni pa la ntutu-nte'ela honi de hota nlernana mormiori-lewlewna plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But when they persecute you in this city , flee into the next , for most certainly I tell you , you will not have gone through the cities of Israel until the Son of Man has come . ||| Pede la'pa ramuki-rama'al miy lia leta ida , de mlia'awa la ' leta id owa'ana . Mimpiesiaya , la'pa miy edonna mlia ' ahor mua'ta leta-ruhuna re honona la ' a Israel , de hota Rimormiori A'na Amuai wia .
A disciple is not above his teacher , nor a servant above his lord . ||| A'n iskola edonna nareh dioin tungkurnu me maka ha rhopna-rli'iru mana edonna narehelia upni-matromni .
It is enough for the disciple that he be like his teacher , and the servant like his lord . If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul , how much more those of his household ! ||| La'pa hota a'n iskola rlernan walia hya ' ed maka tungkurnu de nlernana . Me hopopna-li'iru ida nlernana hya ' ed maka upni-matromni nlernan walia . Emkade wal lia ' Agor miy die . A ' g ed maka emolmolan nekama mak khi ' o'tani la romau ida me miy die emeknekama rom de mniotni . Ne mak edon kpesiay re rhoi A lia Be'elsebul de hegana amlawanni , dewade hota emkameni owa'an la ' miy ? ! Hota ha rhoi nanmi re de npohra-ngehpa memn owa'ana .
Therefore do n't be afraid of them , for there is nothing covered that will not be revealed , or hidden that will not be known . ||| Ina-nara , yan mimta'at rira , yoma mak kayade ' a id mana la ' a Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu hota edonna nayade ' owa'ana . Ne maka kayawunmu hota rat niohora momuou .
What I tell you in the darkness , speak in the light , and what you hear whispered in the ear , proclaim on the housetops . ||| Hya ' ed maka A'ukot targa tiy miy la yawunamnu de mikot nohor momuoga totpena riy rat niohora . Ne hya ' maka A'upupua la miy tlinmi ralamni me mak Awuahaur walia la mel'utni-malienni , de hota repra rauria de mkiakna la lol meni-meni to ' a totpena riy rat niohora .
Do n't be afraid of those who kill the body , but are not able to kill the soul . Rather , fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna . ||| Yan mimta'ata hota riy rwunu-rwenan miy inonmi , yoma miy inonmi de hota riy rwenan nana , mere ta'en niana ir rhi ' yawuhi-yawe'et la miy aranmi jiwa pa rla ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mimta'at la Uplerlawna , yoma E ' ed mak kodi plolli pa kwenna inonmi dewade Nrinnia miy aranmi la ' a ai mormiori ralamni naraka .
Are n't two sparrows sold for an assarion coin ? Not one of them falls to the ground apart from your Father 's will . ||| Ma'nu prowta mak kakleh weli nekane , hota id mana edonna ntuin la tani wawannu , yoma Amlawanmi edonna Nwayow nohora .
But the very hairs of your head are all numbered . ||| Morat lihirmi la ' o'tami ho'mana Uplerlawna Nat niohora momuoga .
Therefore do n't be afraid . You are of more value than many sparrows . ||| La ' hade pede yan mimta'ata . Uplerlawna Nsayn miy me Ntera-ndem miy nareh dioin meman la ma'nu prowta re .
Everyone therefore who confesses me before men , I will also confess him before my Father who is in heaven . ||| La'pa he ' ed maka kwayow nohor pesiayni mai A ' u la ' a rimormiori gaini ralamni de , hota A ' muana wuayow nohora e ' a la ' a A A'mu mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha gaini ralamni wali , Agiwra A mu'tu-rah ' u id e ' a .
But whoever denies me before men , I will also deny him before my Father who is in heaven . ||| Mere la'pa hameni ed mak kreher pa kiwra e ' edonna nlernohor A lia rimormiori gaini ralamni , A muana hota Arieher doini wali e ' a la ' a A A'mu mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha gaini ralamni .
Do n't think that I came to send peace on the earth . I did n't come to send peace , but a sword . ||| Yana mpiarora de Amuai die Agod niek riy mak kden la nohkeran di wawannu pa rora rimormior wialli re rkalwieda . Mere onnila A rerie'yu pede riy id nor rimormior wialli re rahuri-rawo'ora .
For I came to set a man at odds against his father , and a daughter against her mother , and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law . ||| A maimia'yu di mak kariei pia a'na muanke ' a nahal amni , me a'na patke ' a nparwah ' a inni me ina nora yananni patke ' a idma nwohora-ntatr ida .
A man 's foes will be those of his own household . ||| Yah ! Mak khi ' nana yawunu-yawenna yawunu-ya'ara de e nawniair meman la roma ralamni .
He who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me , and he who loves son or daughter more than me is n't worthy of me . ||| Yoma riy maka khoratreria inni-amni pa nhortapling A ' die , de riy de ta'en niana nre'ela ' riy mak klernohor A ' u , yoma nhiol die edonna nla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni . Emkade wal lia riy maka ralamni kod rer lia upni-a'nani ne edonna nken A lia nhioratni .
He who does n't take his cross and follow after me is n't worthy of me . ||| Ne la ' walia riy mak edonna kre'ela pa kor wut A ' pua tler la yamuki-yama'ala onde matmiati pa emolmolan nekama nhoi wawayanni la auwlakra pa nlernohor A ' u , de hota nhiolli de edon naplola emeka riy mak klernohor reri A ' u .
He who seeks his life will lose it , and he who loses his life for my sake will find it . ||| Riy maka nhoratrer tio ' a mormiorni la nohkerna wawannu hota e ' edon nler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Mere la'pa riy maka khoratdoinia mormiorni la ' noh di wawannu pa nlernohor reri A ' u hota nlernana mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
He who receives you receives me , and he who receives me receives him who sent me . ||| Riy meni ed maka kreinian miy , de hade emekwalima e nreinian olek A ' wuali . Ne la'pa hameni nreinian A ' u de emekwalima e nreinian oleka Uplerlawna mak khopan pa Amuai .
He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet 's reward . He who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man 's reward . ||| Riy maka kreiniana makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida , yoma niwa ntulan la e ' a onnila makwohorulu-ktatrulu id hade , riy de hota nlernana siewa-kai emekwalima makwohorulu-ktatrulu re rlernana . Ne he ' ed mak kreiniana-ka'nana riy id mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni yoma eniwra ntulan la e ' a onnila riy mak kaplola hade , hota riy de nlernan wali siewa-kai emekwalima riy mak kaplola re rlernana .
Whoever gives one of these little ones just a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple , most certainly I tell you , he will in no way lose his reward . ||| Ne mpiesiayo ! La'pa hameni ed mak kal ger la riy mak kakleha weli remnia pa na nawe'era tiernu yoma e nhoratreria makpesiay A ' u id wali hade , riy mak kal ger de nek de hota nlernan memna siewni-kaini la ' a Uplerlawna .
When Jesus had finished directing his twelve disciples , he departed from there to teach and preach in their cities . ||| La'pa Yesus Nwatutga riy termida wehrani woru re pa nhorwua dewade Nhoitio'or la gen diewa pa la'pa Nodi liarni la Nwatutu-nwaye ' a , ne Nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ' leta-ruhuna la Galilea yapatni .
Now when John heard in the prison the works of Christ , he sent two of his disciples ||| La ' ler de Yohansi mak kharani etla roma nhio'la ralamni pa la'pa natlin tutga Yesus Kristus maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa de hihi'ini-yapyapni
and said to him , Are you he who comes , or should we look for another ? ||| noma nhopan doinia mutwualli doma mak klernohor reria e ' a pa rla ' pa ratian nohora Yesus plollolli . Riwra , Tuna , O di ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa O maimiaimu ? Me yanpa maka ampei-mnara de riy dom to ' a ?
Jesus answered them , Go and tell John the things which you hear and see , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Hyal miy re , miwali owa'an la Yohansi pa mpiahaur nohora hya ' ed maka ha mimkeka me mitlina .
the blind receive their sight , the lame walk , the lepers are cleansed , the deaf hear , the dead are raised up , and the poor have good news preached to them . ||| De riy maka matni kyata ramkeka , maka lakni nmati , rala'awa , maka ulatni temni yata rkalwied wa , maka hatilu mana ratlina , mak kmati olekwa mana rmori owa'ana , me Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna mana rakot nohora la maka kakleha-kaplara .
Blessed is he who finds no occasion for stumbling in me . ||| Ne la'pa riy honona mak edonna kwayotli A ' u , mere rpesiay niek wa , hota rlernana unut lawna .
As these went their way , Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John , What did you go out into the wilderness to see ? A reed shaken by the wind ? ||| La'pa riy maka Yohansi mutwualli re rawal wia . Dewade Yesus Nwahaur nohor Yohansi la ' a riy rahu mak kden hande . Yesus Niwra , La ' ler ululu de miy e mlia ' a wo'orletna-kawurloini totpena mimkeka hya ' a ? Mpiahaka riy id maka o'tani wolwo'la pa emeknekama wewna lihira maka anni ha nten dioinia rena ?
But what did you go out to see ? A man in soft clothing ? Behold , those who wear soft clothing are in kings ' houses . ||| Mlia ' pa mpiahaka hya ' a pa mimkeka ? Mpiahaka riy ida maka naniairi samoga ? Riy mak emkare de ha rden la tuna ray romni-lewnu !
But why did you go out ? To see a prophet ? Yes , I tell you , and much more than a prophet . ||| Pede mlia ' de mpiahaka hya ' pa mimkeka ? Mlia ' pa mpiahaka makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida toh ? ! Ha naplola . Ne Yohansi nek de nareh dioinia makwohorulu-ktatrulu re .
For this is he , of whom it is written , ‘ Behold , I send my messenger before your face , who will prepare your way before you . ' ||| Yoma la ' Puka ralamni de Uplerlawna Nakot nohora Yohansi kniarni , Niwra , Mhioratreria ! Hadi ed maka Aghopna . Hota Aghopna hade pa nala ' ulg O ' a totpena nwahyar tialan pa Omliola .
Most certainly I tell you , among those who are born of women there has not arisen anyone greater than John the Baptizer , yet he who is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he . ||| Mhioratreria ! La ' ululu la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ler di la ' nohkeran di wawannu de riy id mana edonna nareh dioinia Yohansi makharani . Mere la'pa la ' lera-mela ri maka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka Ray , de E mutnu-rahanu mak kakleh weli id ho'mana nlernan yara ' a-yapalu nareh dioinia maka Yohansi nlernana .
From the days of John the Baptizer until now , the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence , and the violent take it by force . ||| La ' lera Yohansi nwaga kniarni pa nakot nohora de hota Uplerlawna Ntorna-nrautu pa emeka Ray pa la'pa nte'ela ler di , de riy maklekla-makdiaini rwahak talan pa rweyata-rwaniaga e wniatutnu de totpa rodi plolli la .
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John . ||| La'pa edon nte ' ma'ta Yohansi maimiaini de , ha nahniort olek wal lia la ' a Musa deullu-tatarni me la ' wal lia makwohorulu-ktatrulu wniatutnu-wniaye'eni la ' a hya ' maka hota kayamkeka la ' ler di , de hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka Ray .
If you are willing to receive it , this is Elijah , who is to come . ||| Ne la'pa mimiwra mimpiesiaya hya ' mak kaplola , hota miatga de Yohanis de Elia eda de maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de hota nmai .
He who has ears to hear , let him hear . ||| La'pa miy tlinmi erla de mitlin reri !
But to what shall I compare this generation ? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces , who call to their companions ||| Hota Agala yawalliohora hya ' pa ga ' ukot nohora rimormiori mak edon kpesiay A ' u la lera-mela rina ? Ir de emolmolla keke'enku ' a woka woru mak kamtatna la ' a ya'olgeni pa wokni ida npol lia wokni dom to ' a yoma idma edonna nlernohora id lirni pede riwra ,
and say , ‘ We played the flute for you , and you did n't dance . We mourned for you , and you did n't lament . ' ||| Amnairi floiti me tiwla-prai pa amahe ' i-mahepur nohor miy mere miy edonna mlioi-mhieka ! Ampahniar nohor miy lia ' a nhiara matmiati-molmuolu mere miy edonna mkio ' a-mkiakru !
For John came neither eating nor drinking , and they say , ‘ He has a demon . ' ||| Hade emekwalima Yohansi mak kmai noma natahan lara puasa me edonna nemnia anggur turnu noma riy riwra hegana e nhu'ru ralma e ' a .
The Son of Man came eating and drinking , and they say , ‘ Behold , a gluttonous man and a drunkard , a friend of tax collectors and sinners ! ' But wisdom is justified by her children . ||| Noma dodo'ondi Rimormior A'na A ' Muai wia pa A'una-gemnu noma riy riwra , Mimkek to'ola hade . Ya'ante'eni ne , ma'wanu de , pa la ' nor wutga mak kawoka blastena , me riy yatyata-halala rwatamputu . Mere la'pa miy mpiayotlia Agora Yohansi hihi'ini-yapyapni ho'mana Uplerlawna kirkirni-ralma-rior samomuounu mak amlernohora de hota nayamkek la mak klernohora A wniatut muamni re nhiolli-lietni ilu-wniehwa samomuounu .
Then he began to denounce the cities in which most of his mighty works had been done , because they did n't repent . ||| Noma Yesus Nhar lirni pa Nwaghala rimormiori mak kden la leta-ruhun maka Yesus Nhi ' nan hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat harahu . Yoma ramkek memna hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona harahu re mere rahmen to'owa rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioin la ir do'oni-halli .
Woe to you , Chorazin ! Woe to you , Bethsaida ! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you , they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes . ||| Yesus Niwra , Hoi ! Makden Korasim nora Betsaid miy ree ! Hota mlier la yatlorni-yatra'ani ! Yoma miy edonna mpiadan nohora hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka ha mimkek oleka re . Makden la Tirus me Sidon edon ramkek nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak emkare la ' ler ululu , mere la'pa Aghi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak emkare la mak kden la leta Tirus nora Sidon la ' ler ululu , de ramkek nana neknanama plol toto ' pa rnair oleka naniairi yaluli-yahona pa ra rtutga ralamni mawla la do'oni-halli me rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioini oleka do'oni-halli re .
But I tell you , it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you . ||| Mhioratreria , la'pa ntutu-nte'ela watghudi lokarni-tatiaili lahannu la lera noha niatni de hota Uplerlawna niukamnu la ' miy wawanmi nareh dioin la mak kden la leta Tirus nora Sidon re .
You , Capernaum , who are exalted to heaven , you will go down to Hades . For if the mighty works had been done in Sodom which were done in you , it would have remained until today . ||| Ne hota mak kden la Kapernaum miy , la ' wniarormi de hota rran tutul miy nanmi la tulu-lyanti ? Hade edon emkade . Hota reriehenu rrinnia miy lia ai mormiori ralamni naraka . Makden la Sodom edon ramkek nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka Aghi ' nana re , mere la'pa hihi ' a-yapyapi maka Aghi ' oleka pa mimkek nana re , de Aghi ' la ' ler ululu pa makden Sodom ramkeka nana neknanama plol toto ' pa rhoitio'or doin olek do'oni-halli . La'pa emkade de ir letni de edonna rtutin doinia la pede ed neka mla ' dodo'ondi .
But I tell you that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom on the day of judgment , than for you . ||| Mhioratreria ! La'pa ntutu-nte'ela Uplerlawna maimiaini la ' ler noha niatni , de Uplerlawna niukamnu la miy wawanmi , de nareh dioin la makden la Sodom re .
At that time , Jesus answered , I thank you , Father , Lord of heaven and earth , that you hid these things from the wise and understanding , and revealed them to infants . ||| La ' ler de Yesus Nsumbain pa Niwra , Ama , Orgahi-Orha ' a mak ktorna-krautia nohmarna nora lyanti tulu . A'uli-uwedi O ' a yoma wniarormu-wnialaimu , hihi'imu-yapyapmu , de O e Muwunmua la ' a riy miaka kakriahlu la iskola me rwarora ir er mak katu , mere Omukota la riy maka nhiolli-lietni emeka keke'enku ' a pa rlol yawa .
Yes , Father , for so it was well-pleasing in your sight . ||| Yoma plol toto ' a pa hade ed mak kla ' nana A'mu O ralma-riormu .
All things have been delivered to me by my Father . No one knows the Son , except the Father , neither does anyone know the Father , except the Son and he to whom the Son desires to reveal him . ||| Nsumbain pa nhorwua noma Nakot owa'an la mak kden hande Niwra , A A'mu Nal oleka plolli-mneheni kirkira-ralma-rior samomuounu mai A ' wua . Riy id mana edon nat niohora A ' u eneknek to'ama A A'mu . Me riy id mana edonna nat niohora A A'mu eneknek to'ama E A'nani A ' u , ne riy mak Agiwra ukot wahyaria A A'mu la ira .
Come to me , all you who labor and are heavily burdened , and I will give you rest . ||| Ina-nara , mmiai wia mai A ' di wa , miy hononmi mak kakleha oleka ruri-lai wia la ' a hya ' ed maka ha mikwara re . Mai pia utih liwatmi me uwrien aranmi .
Take my yoke upon you and learn from me , for I am gentle and humble in heart , and you will find rest for your souls . ||| Mliernohora hya ' ed maka A'ukota ne mitlin pa wuatutga tiy miy . Yoma A nhiolu-lie'tu de mnapla pa Agatu ghu'ru-ghelma , ne hota miy ralammi namtiertiernu .
For my yoke is easy , and my burden is light . ||| Yoma hya ' ed maka A'ukota , de nla ' nana miy ralma-riormi , me kwar maka Aghopan pa ha mikwara re , rapranrana .
At that time , Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the grain fields . His disciples were hungry and began to pluck heads of grain and to eat . ||| Lera ida la ' Sabat lerni ler maka Yahudi yana rkar lia de Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rala ' a la nhyi ' wetra ' lawna ida ralamni , noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rkura wetra ' lawna re harni pa ra'ana emkade to'owa yoma raplara olek wa .
But the Pharisees , when they saw it , said to him , Behold , your disciples do what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath . ||| La'pa riy Parisi ramkek nana noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Mumkek la me ! Maka Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a re rpera-rdaiti olek la it agamni deullu-tatarni , yoma ir e rkar lia ' a Sabat lerni .
But he said to them , Have n't you read what David did when he was hungry , and those who were with him , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Miy mpiaik nan olek la ' a hya ' maka Daud nhi ' a la ' lera e nora talanwalli re raplara toh !
how he entered into God 's house and ate the show bread , which was not lawful for him to eat , nor for those who were with him , but only for the priests ? ||| Enler la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni pa enora mutu korni re ra'ana rot miaka rala oleka la Uplerlawna , kennama la ' a it agamni deullu-tatarni de mak ka'ana roti re de eneknek to'ama imam-imam rmeh ' a .
Or have you not read in the law that on the Sabbath day the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and are guiltless ? ||| Ne miy mpiaik nan olek wal lia Musa deullu-tatarni toh ! E rhorat targa la Musa pukni de imam-imam re rtepartarlia kniarni la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini nayanni la ' a Sabat lerni . Emkade pede emekto'ama rpera-rdaitia deulu-tatra la ' a Sabat lerni , mere Uplerlawna edonna Nwaghala ira .
But I tell you that one greater than the temple is here . ||| Mere mhioratreria hya ' maka ukota ri . La ' handi de Ed maka Enreh wialia Uplerlawna roma kreini .
But if you had known what this means , ‘ I desire mercy , and not sacrifice , ' you would n't have condemned the guiltless . ||| Ne la ' Puka ralamni de e riwra , Rimormiori maka ktulla-ksayni rimormior wialli khi ' A ralmu pa uhepru de nareh dioin meman la riy mak kala prehenni-maunu mai A ' u . La'pa plola pa miy e mnia'erit nan oleka lira re , de hota taken niana mpiaghala riy maka edonna khala .
For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath . ||| A'ukot hari honona yoma Rimormiori A'nani A ' die ed mak kodi plolli pa A'ukot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplola onde nhala pa itsi ' a la Sabat lerni .
He departed from there and went into their synagogue . ||| Yesus Nto'or la hande ne Nla Nokria gen miaka nhi'inde Yahudi re rhi ' a kreini-iskolli .
And behold , there was a man with a withered hand . They asked him , Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day ? so that they might accuse him . ||| Nla ' noma Nlernana riy maka limni walli kmati . La hande de riy doma e rahak kahelli-kaha'arni la Yesus totpena Nhi ' de rodia la letgara lawawna , pede rmai pia ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , la ' O wniarormu de itsi ' kalwieda riy mak kamehra la ' a Sabat lerni de lol talanni ?
He said to them , What man is there among you who has one sheep , and if this one falls into a pit on the Sabbath day , wo n't he grab on to it and lift it out ? ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla Niwra , La'pa miy pipmi-dummi ida e ntuin tiar lia ' a hu'ula-tpopoini id ralamni la ' a Sabat lerni , de hota mimkek rer nieka dum de polpuolu-hawaunu la hu'ul de ralamni ? ! Edonan toh !
Of how much more value then is a man than a sheep ! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day . ||| Ne rimormiori re , Uplerlawna Nsaynia hare pa nareh dioin pipdiuma . Pede itsi ' kalwiedweda riy la Sabat lerni de ed mak klernohora Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni .
Then he told the man , Stretch out your hand . He stretched it out , and it was restored whole , just like the other . ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot la riy maka limni walli kmat die Niwra , Mpuetar limmu ! Noma riy de nwetar limni de mtatande nekpa nnienni nmolu pa emekwalima limni walli mak kmormiori die .
But the Pharisees went out and conspired against him , how they might destroy him . ||| Mere riy Parisi re rhoitio'or la gen miaka Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli de , na'nama rna'ohma pa rwenna Yesus .
Jesus , perceiving that , withdrew from there . Great multitudes followed him , and he healed them all , ||| Yesus Nat niohor meman la ' a Parisi re nnia'ohma yatyatni la E ' a . Pede plet pa Yesus Nwaran la ' a gen die ne rirahu rlernohor reria . Ne Yesus Nhi ' a mak ksaki re honona pa rkalwied la nnienni-nhienni nora mehrani-maunu .
and commanded them that they should not make him known , ||| Mere Yesus Nahmen pa riy rla rwahaur nohora E ' a .
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet , saying , ||| Mere la ' Yesus Nwatutu me Enhi ' kalwieda rira la nnieni-nhiena pede nhi ' aplola Uplerlawna lirni , maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya ha nhorat targa la Puka niwra ,
Behold , my servant whom I have chosen , my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased . I will put my Spirit on him . He will proclaim justice to the nations . ||| Hadi de A hopopnu maka Awualir niana . Riy maka Asiayni inhatta me khi ' A ralmu pa nahepru . Hota Agala A Nhi'wu la E wawannu pede hota E ' ed mak kakot nohora la ' a rimormiori la ' a noheri woru-lyanti nayanni de Niwra hota Enhi ' riy pa ror owa'an Uplerlawna rkalwieda .
He will not strive , nor shout , neither will anyone hear his voice in the streets . ||| Hota E edonna Nhi ' yawo'ora , onde polpuolu-hawaunu E tullu-petanni la ' a loi liawna-talan lawna .
He wo n't break a bruised reed . He wo n't quench a smoking flax , until he leads justice to victory . ||| Emolmolan nekama au dieutu mak kerna mere edonna rtewar doinia la , me wa'du maka mormiorni nhelelma ho'mana edon rwenan nana , emkade wal lia A hopopnu de wniehwani-liakatni mnapal la ' riy mak kakleha ruri-lai . Mere hota Ntekal rer niekpa totpa rimormiori ror owa'an Uplerlawna pa rkalwied owa'ana .
In his name , the nations will hope . ||| Pa hota rimormiori la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni rha'ara aranni la E ' a .
Then one possessed by a demon , blind and mute , was brought to him , and he healed him , so that the blind and mute man both spoke and saw . ||| La'pa nhorwua dewade riy rodia riy mat yata ida , me naplinu naltieri wiali yoma hegana-kawnu nhu'ru ralma . Noka Yesus Nhokar doin hegana-kawnu mak khu ' r ralma pede riy de naltieri me namkek samomuou owa'ana .
All the multitudes were amazed , and said , Can this be the son of David ? ||| Nhor nioma riy honona rwer rer wiawni pa riwra , Yanpa hadi ed maka ha riwra Daud duratni-waitni inhatta maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru ?
But when the Pharisees heard it , they said , This man does not cast out demons except by Beelzebul , the prince of the demons . ||| La'pa riy Parisi ratlin nan hare noma riwra , Oi ! Riy di enekneka Nhokar doin to ' a hegana-kawnu rella yoma Be'elsebul , hegana amlawanni de , ed mak kala ruri-lai la E ' a .
Knowing their thoughts , Jesus said to them , Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation , and every city or house divided against itself will not stand . ||| Mere Parisi ralma-riorni re Yesus Nat niohor momuoga . Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hegana re emeknekama hairi ida . La'pa la hairi ida rimormiorni ema rhakre'era la wokni-wokni mak kahuri-kawo'ora , de hota hair de edonna namteman plalahwa . Me luwu-a'na ida onde leta-ruhuna la'pa rden rer lia yahuri-yawo'ora de hota rweyata-rwaniawua .
If Satan casts out Satan , he is divided against himself . How then will his kingdom stand ? ||| Emkade walia la hegana amlawanni tnioranni-riautnu . La'pa hegana woka-le ' u ida , nhokra hegana woka-le ' u dom to ' a , de hota hegana tnioranni-riautnu ema reyapie'era .
If I by Beelzebul cast out demons , by whom do your children cast them out ? Therefore they will be your judges . ||| La'pa mikot emkade mai A ' u nnia'eratni de hota mak klernohora miy niek de rnairia hegana amlawanni plolli-mneheni pa Nhokar doinia hegana-kawnu . Mere mak klernohor miy nek de rat niohora wniarormi de nhala .
But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons , then God 's Kingdom has come upon you . ||| Mere Aghokra-liaiya hegana-kawnu yatni-rha'ani re de Aniairia Uplerlawna Nhiwni plolli-mneheni . Ne hade e ntut mueman de Uplerlawna ed mak kodi plolli pa emeka Ray , ne miy e mimkek nan oleka E rurni-laini .
Or how can one enter into the house of the strong man and plunder his goods , unless he first bind the strong man ? Then he will plunder his house . ||| Itala mak karuri-kalai ida pa itsi ' la yawalliohora . De la'pa riy riwra reyahru mak karuri-kalai ida re'eni-tniarnu , pa'etnu de nwutu-nkohg ulga mak karuri-kalai die nanpena nler la mak karuri-kalai die romni ralamni pa na'ala hade re'eni-tniarnu . Hade emekwali Aghi ' a la hegana amlawanni .
He who is not with me is against me , and he who does n't gather with me , scatters . ||| Riy mak edonna klernohor reri A ' u de ir er mak khoklira-kpah ' a waw mai A ' u . Ne riy mak edonna ktulan mai A ' u , de e ' ed mak kweyata-kwaniawua A tulla-knia'ru .
Therefore I tell you , every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men , but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven men . ||| La ' hade pede totpena miatga , de la'pa riy nhi ' a do ' a-hala me napolu-naliella Uplerlawna , de hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli re . Mere la'pa riy meni ed mak kapolu-kaliella Uplerlawna Nhiwni , de riy de , hota Uplerlawna edon Namou-nawitan la do'oni-halli de .
Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man , it will be forgiven him , but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit , it will not be forgiven him , either in this age , or in that which is to come . ||| Ne la'pa riy ida nakot hadom pa na nweyata Rimormior A'na de nanni de hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli de . Mere la'pa riy meni ed mak kapolu-kaliella Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , de Uplerlawna edon Namou-nawitna riy de do'oni-halli de la dodo'ondi , pa nden nek la pa Uplerlawna noh warwuarnu lerni Ntutu-nte'ewa .
Either make the tree good and its fruit good , or make the tree corrupt and its fruit corrupt , for the tree is known by its fruit . ||| Miy miwra mliernana ha wo ' samomuou , de mpiak la yawuli-yatniamin maka onni kpoti-kadwu . La'pa au muaka khoptutu-khoplera , de hota wo'oni mana yat walia . Orwo ' a-auwo ' a mak kyata onde samounu , de tamkek nek la wo'oni .
You offspring of vipers , how can you , being evil , speak good things ? For out of the abundance of the heart , the mouth speaks . ||| Miy die riy yatyat memna miy pede emkameni la hota miy mikot nohora hya ' mak kalwiedweda ? ! Hya ' ed maka klergot la it nurnu , de hade ed mak kwatiaga it ihranu ralamni .
The good man out of his good treasure brings out good things , and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings out evil things . ||| Riy maka ralamni kalwieda-paitiota , de nhi'inde rakot nohora hya ' ed mak kalwiedweda yoma ihranu ralamni npenpuen lia kalwiedwedni . Ne riy yatyata-halala , nanpena rakot nohora yatyatni-halalli . Yoma yatyata-halala nagengen lia ira .
I tell you that every idle word that men speak , they will give account of it in the day of judgment . ||| Hade pede mhioratreria ! La ' pa nte'ela lera-mela noha niatni maka Uplerlawna Ntorna watghudi Nukum rimormiori , de rima-rima hota nwalol nohora orgahani lirni-tunnu la ' Uplerlawna gaini ralamni . La'pa lirni-tunnu maka riy edon rwaror nohora mere pleta-plet pa rakot nek wa , hade ho'mana rwalol nohora la Uplerlawna .
For by your words you will be justified , and by your words you will be condemned . ||| Yoma hota miy lirmi-tunmi maka mpiet la ' lera-mela ri , er maka khi ' aplol miy onde miy lirmi-tunmi re nekpa rwaghal miy lia ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori it la watghudi lokarni-tatiaili lahannu .
Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered , Teacher , we want to see a sign from you . ||| La lera ida noma makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ror wut nieka riy Parisi re rakot la Yesus riwra , Tungkurga , Mhi ' teka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona totpena ntutga de Uplerlawna ed mak kala plolli-mneheni tiy O ' a .
But he answered them , An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign , but no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet . ||| Yesus Nwahla , Adoh ! Tuw di , de rimormiori yatyata-halala mak kahmena kpesiay A ' u . Mhiopan pa Aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona totpena mpiesiaya . Mere hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona kuku ' nek ho'mana A ' g edon tiutga tiy miy ! Eneknek to'ama mak makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yunus ha nlernan de .
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the huge fish , so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth . ||| Yunus nhol niek la up worum lawna apannu ralamni la lera-mel pa wotelu . Emkade wal lia Rimormiori A'nani A ' die hota ghol niana lera-mel pa wotelu la ' a noha-rai apannu .
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it , for they repented at the preaching of Jonah , and behold , someone greater than Jonah is here . ||| La ' noha niatni , la ' ler maka Uplerlawna lerni ntutu-nte'ela pa Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni , de hota makden la Niniwe rtutrier pia hota rto'ona riy tuwu di . Yoma mak kden la leta Niniwe rhoitio'or doin-rtahnei dioinia do'oni-halli la ' lera Yunus nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ' ira . Mere la dodo'ondi de Agetla miy gaimi mere miy edon mitlin la A li'ru pa mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin do'omi-halmi re , kennama A ' di de ureh dioinia Yunus de .
The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it , for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon , and behold , someone greater than Solomon is here . ||| Ne la'pa nte'ela lera noha niatni , la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni de hota pat maran mak kwatiawua weli tranna mata angin selatan ntutrieri pia nto'on reria riy tuwu di . Yoma pat maran de nwatiawua noha honi-rai tawnu olietlet pa nmai pia natlin nana wniatutu-wniaye ' a Salomo mak katu die . Mere la ' dodo'ondi de Agetla miy gaimi ralamni mere miy edon mitlin A li'ru pa mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin do'omi-halmi , kennama A'ureh dioinia Salomo .
When an unclean spirit has gone out of a man , he passes through waterless places seeking rest , and does n't find it . ||| La'pa yatni-rha'ani nahniokar doin la ' a riy ida ralamni , de loldoi-loldai lia wo'or kerkerna totpena nahak geni id owa'ana totpena nhu'ru ralma , mere hota edonna nlernana .
Then he says , ‘ I will return into my house from which I came , ' and when he has come back , he finds it empty , swept , and put in order . ||| La ' hade pede yatni-rha'ani de wniarorni de hota nawali owa'an la riy de . La'pa nawal wia de namkek de riy de nahgal tetema , ne nmou-nwitna emeka likti id maka ha rwahyar momuoga ne rwahi ' a-rwayod tiarga .
Then he goes and takes with himself seven other spirits more evil than he is , and they enter in and dwell there . The last state of that man becomes worse than the first . Even so will it be also to this evil generation . ||| Noma nla ' owa'an pa nmai die nodia yatni-rha'ani wo'itu de yatni-halli nareh dioin memn owa'an la e ' a . Dewade ha rler la riy de ralamni owa'ana . Pede la'awa hohoni , de riy de nler la polpuol inni-wakwak amni mak karehi owa'an la ' ulul genni . Hota hade ed maka tamkek nan wal lia ' riy yatyata-halala tuwu di .
While he was yet speaking to the multitudes , behold , his mother and his brothers stood outside , seeking to speak to him . ||| La'pa Yesus entepartar mua'ta la wniahauru Nora riy mutlialawna re dewade inni nora a'nani re korni rmai wia . Noma rtutrier lia tio'or pa riwra rma rwatroma Yesus pa rwahaur wutu .
One said to him , Behold , your mother and your brothers stand outside , seeking to speak to you . ||| Noma riy id la riy mutlialawna re nakot la Yesus Niwra , Tuna , Tuna inni nora ammu-hyalmu e rtutrier lia tio'ora . Riwra rmai pia ror Tuna rwahauru .
But he answered him who spoke to him , Who is my mother ? Who are my brothers ? ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora pa Nakot nohor plein la riy de , Niwra , A i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu la Uplerlawna yamkekni de he ' a ?
He stretched out his hand toward his disciples , and said , Behold , my mother and my brothers ! ||| Noma Yesus Ntutga mak klernohor reri e ' a re , na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Hari , er maka a i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu .
For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven , he is my brother , and sister , and mother . ||| Riy maka khi ' nana A A'mu la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha ralma-riorni , de hare er mak kla ' A i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu .
On that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the seaside . ||| La ' ler de nekpa Yesus Nto'or la rom de pa Nodi liarni la ' danau aratni pa Namtatna la ' hande .
Great multitudes gathered to him , so that he entered into a boat and sat , and all the multitude stood on the beach . ||| Riy harahu rwayotil pa rma rpepan nana Yesus , pa narieiniande Yesus Nwatitin genni la puou mak kapniali id wawannu pa Namtatna la ' hande . Ne riy rariahu re rtutrier lia eni wawannu .
He spoke to them many things in parables , saying , Behold , a farmer went out to sow . ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora pa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a la ' a lira nnio ' a-niatu harahu la ' a riy rariahu re . Niwra , Mak kanhyi ' a-katlunni ida nla ' pa nrinnia winni-hgonni la nhyi'ini .
As he sowed , some seeds fell by the roadside , and the birds came and devoured them . ||| La'pa nrinnia wini-hgona re dom de rtuin la talla ralamni , noma onu-ma'nu rmai pia rtotan nan momuoga .
Others fell on rocky ground , where they did n't have much soil , and immediately they sprang up , because they had no depth of earth . ||| Dom de rtuin la watgau ralamni pa ntai tani oke ' to ' a . Plet pa nmor wia yoma tani mniha .
When the sun had risen , they were scorched . Because they had no root , they withered away . ||| Mere la'pa lera nhit wa dewade rmakulli-rmarella pa rmat wia yoma ga'arni edonna nler plollol la tani ralamni .
Others fell among thorns . The thorns grew up and choked them . ||| Wini-hgon de , dom de rtuin la pu'na-kiarti pa nhi'nande ruwnu-ahla rururni-karkiaratni re rmor pia natolaw wenwenna pede ta'en niana ha rmori plollola .
Others fell on good soil and yielded fruit , some one hundred times as much , some sixty , and some thirty . ||| Mere dom pal die rtuin la tan ihi wawannu pa rpoti-rkadwua pede dom de ra'unu-rayeh nohora wo'oni rahg ida , me dom pal die terampwonema . Ne la dom pal owa'an de rawo ' nana terampwotelu .
He who has ears to hear , let him hear . ||| Pede ina-nara , miy hononmi mhioratreria ! La'pa miy tlinmi erla de , mitlin reri !
The disciples came , and said to him , Why do you speak to them in parables ? ||| Nhor nioma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rma ratiana Yesus riwra , Ama , nihya'pa A'mu Naltier lia nhiopun lawna ralamni de A'mu Nnairia yawalliohora ?
He answered them , To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven , but it is not given to them . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Aghi ' emkade , yoma Uplerlawna edon Nal mutlialawna honona re pa rna'erit nan la ' Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu pa emeka Ray . Mere miy die nanpena er maka Uplerlawna Nhu'ula tlinmi-nwe'er matmi totpena miat niohora la hya ' ed maka riy raplin niohor ma'ta la ' a Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu .
For whoever has , to him will be given , and he will have abundance , but whoever does n't have , from him will be taken away even that which he has . ||| Yoma la ' he ' mak kiwra kna'erit nana de hota ra'itr owa'an la wniarorni-wnialaini pede hota nnia'eratni de narehi-nalawna . Mere la'pa riy mak kahmena kna'erit nana Uplerlawna lirni , de hya ' mak enatg oleka de hota Uplerlawna Na ' owa'ana .
Therefore I speak to them in parables , because seeing they do n't see , and hearing , they do n't hear , neither do they understand . ||| La ' hade pede Aniairia yawalliohora la ' a nhiopun lawna gaini totpena mak kahmena rlernohora A ' u , la'pa ramkek nana A hihi ' u-yapya'pu ho'mana ta'en niana rna'erit nana . Ne la'pa ratlin nana A li'ru de mana raplinu-raplo ' nohora .
In them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled , which says , ‘ By hearing you will hear , and will in no way understand , Seeing you will see , and will in no way perceive , ||| La ' hade de hota plola la Uplerlawna lirni maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya nakot nohora niwra , Hota ir e ratlin reria mere raplinu-raplo ' a . Ne la'pa ramkek reria ho'mana hota edon rna'erit nana .
for this people 's heart has grown callous , their ears are dull of hearing , and they have closed their eyes , or else perhaps they might perceive with their eyes , hear with their ears , understand with their heart , and would turn again , and I would heal them . ' ||| Yoma ir ralma-riorni emeka ha kniukmu . Tlinni-matni mana ratniutwu . Ir rhi ' emkade totpena yan ratlina , yan ramkeka , yan rna'erit nana totpena yan neka rawal mai A ' u totpa hota A ' g ed maka khi ' ir pa rler la kalwiedni .
But blessed are your eyes , for they see , and your ears , for they hear . ||| Mere miy di de mliernan oleka unut lawna . Yoma rhu'ula tlinmi me rwe'er matmi pede mnia'erit nan oleka wa .
For most certainly I tell you that many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which you see , and did n't see them , and to hear the things which you hear , and did n't hear them . ||| Mhioratreria , makwohorulu-ktatrulu harahu me la ' walia riy doma maka khi ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni la ' ler ululu rwahak pa ramkek walia hihi ' a-yapyap miak Aghi ' nana , me rwahak pa ratlin wal lia ' hya ' ed maka Awuatut niohor di , mere A maimia'yu lerni edon ntutu-nte ' ma'ta pede ta'en niana ramkeka onde ratlina .
Hear , then , the parable of the farmer . ||| Pede mitlina yawalliohora la ' a mak kwarinnia wini-hgona nnia'eratni .
When anyone hears the word of the Kingdom and does n't understand it , the evil one comes and snatches away that which has been sown in his heart . This is what was sown by the roadside . ||| Wini-hgona mak ktuin la talla ralamni de emeknekama riy maka katlin olek la ' Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu mere edonna rna'erit nana . Noma hegana amlawanni nmai pia nwarui-nwate'la nana lir maka ed olek la ' a hare ihranu ralamni .
What was sown on the rocky places , this is he who hears the word and immediately with joy receives it , ||| Wini-hgon mak ktuin la watwuatnu nnia'eratni de riy mak katlin nana lir kalwied de dewade leretniekla ralamni naplele'er pa nreiniana .
yet he has no root in himself , but endures for a while . When oppression or persecution arises because of the word , immediately he stumbles . ||| Mere lir kalwied de edonna naga'ar la ' ihranu ralamni pede nhi'nande edon nalo'on wali ne nwal lia hamamuamua . La'pa nler la kropanni-krieutnu , onde yamuki-yama'ala yoma la ' a kot de rerieini , dewade nleretniekla nwadur la pesiayni .
What was sown among the thorns , this is he who hears the word , but the cares of this age and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word , and he becomes unfruitful . ||| Wini-hgon mak ktuin la ruwnu-ahla pu'na-kiarti , de emeknekama riy mak katlin nana lir kalwied de , mere ralamni mak kod rer lia nohkerna rororni-lailiaini , hihi'ini-yapyapni me re ' a-tniaru , tototni-wudwiudni emeka nutni-ndahla lir kalwied de nhi'nande nakleh wo ' a .
What was sown on the good ground , this is he who hears the word and understands it , who most certainly bears fruit and produces , some one hundred times as much , some sixty , and some thirty . ||| Ne la'pa wini-hgon maka ktuin la tan ihi , de emeknekama riy mak katlin nana kot de pa rna'erit nana dewade rlernohor reria pede mormiorni re rdella plol wawna . Riy mak katlina dom de emeknekama wini-hgon mak kawo ' a liawanni pa rlernana wo'oni nti'il nana ralamni re'eni rahu ida , dom pal die terampwonema , ne la ' wal diom de terampwotelu .
He set another parable before them , saying , The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field , ||| Yesus Nakot nohora yawalliohora id owa'an la ' a nhiopun lawna id letgarni Niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu la E rimormiorni de emekwalima yawalliohor di . De la ' mak kanhyi ' ida , ne'era wini-hgon samomuou la ' a nhyi'ini id ralamni .
but while people slept , his enemy came and sowed darnel weeds also among the wheat , and went away . ||| Ne hota la ' mela nayaplin niohora , noma mak kanhyi ' de eriaini nma nrinnie'era wewnihi winni la ' wutga wini-hgon maka ora nhyi ' de ne'er targ oleka re wawannu , dewade nmol wua .
But when the blade sprang up and produced grain , then the darnel weeds appeared also . ||| Noma la'pa nte'ela lerni pa wini-hgona re rmor wia ne harni re mana rpoka-rpah ' a wa , mere ramkek de , wewnihi mana rpoti-rkaduw wali .
The servants of the householder came and said to him , ‘ Sir , did n't you sow good seed in your field ? Where did these darnel weeds come from ? ' ||| Dewade ora nhyi ' de hopopanni-lili'irnu rmai pia rakot la riwra , Matroma , o ' edonna mtiamin neka wewnihi la o nhyi'imu , ne hya ' nrei piede wewnihi e ndeha nana wetra ' lawna , wini-hgon samomuou rena ?
He said to them , ‘ An enemy has done this . ' The servants asked him , ‘ Do you want us to go and gather them up ? ' ||| Noma ora nhyi ' de nwalolla niwra , A eria'yu kniarni hade . Noma hopopanni re rakot la ora nhyi ' de owa'ana riwra , La'pa Tuna nwayow de , amla ' pa mpuh dioinia wewnihi rello ?
But he said , ‘ No , lest perhaps while you gather up the darnel weeds , you root up the wheat with them . ||| Mere ora nhyi ' a nahmena ne niwra , Yoma hota la'pa mimpiuh dioinia wewnihi re de hota wetra ' lawna re mana hota rawniuh wiali .
Let both grow together until the harvest , and in the harvest time I will tell the reapers , First , gather up the darnel weeds , and bind them in bundles to burn them , but gather the wheat into my barn . ' ||| Miolin doinia la pa wewnihi nor wutga wetra ' lawna re rmor wiutu totpena la'pa nte'ela lerni pa rreikia nanpena a'ukot la mak kreiki pa rwuhia wok momuoga wewnihi re ne rwatiehra totpena rhoklai la , nanpena rawok kalwiedweda wetra ' lawanni re pa rkenia la dudnu .
He set another parable before them , saying , The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took , and sowed in his field , ||| Yesus Nwahaur nohor owa'ana yawalliohora id la ' a nhiopnu ralamni Niwra , Itala sasawi ola ida maka rtamnia la nhyi'ini pa twahaur nohora Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu la E rimormiorni .
which indeed is smaller than all seeds . But when it is grown , it is greater than the herbs and becomes a tree , so that the birds of the air come and lodge in its branches . ||| Sasawi ol de ha luwlu'wu id hade la ' a ha'ola korni mak kden la nohkeran di wawannu . Mere la'pa nmori , de hota npoti-nkadwu , pa nareh niana yawuli-yatniamni re korni . Hota olli-tapalli re rpoti-rkadwu pa nhi'nande onu-ma'nu rma rapuon la ' a sasaw die tutnu-akni .
He spoke another parable to them . The Kingdom of Heaven is like yeast which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal , until it was all leavened . ||| Yesus Nakot nohor wal lia yawalliohora dom to ' a la ' a nhiopnu ralamni , Niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa Uplerlawna Ntorna-nraut de emeknekama tgo ' maka a'na patke ' a ida na ' nana pa la nawotra-nawah ' a wutga la wetra ' ota kilu terampwogata pa nha'ata mneneha .
Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the multitudes , and without a parable , he did n't speak to them , ||| La ' wniatutnu honona la ' a rirahu re , Yesus Nnairi mamainia yawalliohora .
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet , saying , I will open my mouth in parables , I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world . ||| Wniatutu-wniaye ' a emkade naplol nohora Uplerlawna lirni maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida nhorat targa de , La'pa Agora ira mpahaur de Agala yawalliohora . Ne hota A'ukot nohora la ' a hya ' maka riy raplin niohor ma'ta la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Na'ohi-na'ara nohkerna-rai miaran di la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la ler di .
Then Jesus sent the multitudes away , and went into the house . His disciples came to him , saying , Explain to us the parable of the darnel weeds of the field . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhoitio'or la riy rariahu re pa nhu'ru la roma ralamni . Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai pia rakot la riwra , Tuna , ampak pa Mukot nohora teka yawalliohora wewnihi die nnia'eratni la ' mai ami .
He answered them , He who sows the good seed is the Son of Man , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Riy maka krinnie'era wini-hgon samomuou , de Rimormiori A'nani A ' u inhatti .
the field is the world , the good seeds are the children of the Kingdom , and the darnel weeds are the children of the evil one . ||| Nhyi ' a de nohkerna wawannu inhatte . Wini-hgona kalwiedweda , emeknekama Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu . Wewnihi de riy maka klernohora hegana-kawnu ralma-riorni .
The enemy who sowed them is the devil . The harvest is the end of the age , and the reapers are angels . ||| Eriai miak ktamnia wewnihi de hegana amlawanni inhatte . Ler maka ha rreiki-rwo'ora de rtut niohora lera hohoni inhatta maka Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni-tatiaili lahannu . Ne la ' a riy maka kreiki-kwo'ora de Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu inhatte .
As therefore the darnel weeds are gathered up and burned with fire , so will it be at the end of this age . ||| Ne la'pa wewnihi maka rwuh dioin la pa rhoklai la de emekwalima hota la ' a hya ' ed maka Aghi ' a la ' a lera hohoni .
The Son of Man will send out his angels , and they will gather out of his Kingdom all things that cause stumbling and those who do iniquity , ||| De hota Rimormiori A'nani A ' u ghopan pa A hopopnu re rawoka-rale'ga riy maka ktot pa khi ' a A mu'tu-rah ' u mak Agodi plolli pa emeka Ray ida , mere plollolli de ir er maka karei pia riy rler la do ' a-hala ralamni , me ir er mak khi ' yatyatni-halalli .
and will cast them into the furnace of fire . There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ||| Hota hare honona re nekpa A hopopnu re ra'ala pa rrinnia la li'ina mak kdudmu-klairi ralamni ne la hande de tatlin nan to ' a rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni .
Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the Kingdom of their Father . He who has ears to hear , let him hear . ||| Mere la'pa riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , de hota liplipa-kamka'ma , hitita-reprepra emeknekama lera la ' a Uplerlawna , ir Amlawanni de genni maka Ntorna-nrautu emeka Ray . La ' hade pede mniair tlinmi pa ma mitlina .
Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like treasure hidden in the field , which a man found and hid . In his joy , he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field . ||| Hyal miy re , la'pa itmormior lia Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu ralamni de , it di de emeknekama riy ida mak kmai pia klernana re ' a-tniar la tani niahi ralamni . Noma nahmena riy rlernana pede nade ' owa'an re ' a-tniar die la kdieldelamni . Nhorwua dewade nahepur nande nla ' pa na'ol momuoga hyonni-hyanni honona na'nama nawal pia nma nawel tani nora re ' a-tniar die .
Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a merchant seeking fine pearls , ||| Yawalliohor di mana nakot nohora la ' a itmormior lia Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu ralamni . Lera ida mak ka'olu-kala ' a ida nwahaka mutiara mak kalweli .
who having found one pearl of great price , he went and sold all that he had and bought it . ||| La'pa nlernana mutiara mak kalwel die noka nla ' pa na'ol dioin momuoga hyonni-hyanni honona na'nama nma nawelia mutiara de .
Again , the Kingdom of Heaven is like a dragnet that was cast into the sea and gathered some fish of every kind , ||| Hyal miy re , itnairia tiala maka ha rrinnia la ' a danau ralamni pa ta takot nohora owa'ana it mormiorni la Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu ralamni . Makatiala ida nrinni tialli la ' a gera ralamni dewade nlernana i'na-ya'ana palmuarnia rupni-rupni .
which , when it was filled , fishermen drew up on the beach . They sat down and gathered the good into containers , but the bad they threw away . ||| La'pa tial de npen lia i'na-ya'ana noma makatial de nwe'eta tial della keranni . Nhor nia'nama nora riy dom to ' a ramtatna pa ramou-ratoha i'na-ya'ana re honona . Samomuounu de ral to ' a ne yatyatni de rhopliala .
So it will be in the end of the world . The angels will come and separate the wicked from among the righteous , ||| Emkade wal lia la'pa lera hohoni ntutu-nte'ewa , de hota Uplerlawna hopopanni re rla ramou-ratoha riy yatyata la ' a riy kalwiedweda mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
and will cast them into the furnace of fire . There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ||| Nhor nia'nama riy yatyata re , hota Uplerlawna Nnaklia harella la ' a li'ina maka klomlomra , ne la hande de tatlin nan to ' a rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni .
Jesus said to them , Have you understood all these things ? They answered him , Yes , Lord . ||| Yesus Natiana maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Dodo'ondi de , miy e mnia'erit nan nohora yawalliohora maka A'ukot nohora rina ? Noma rwahla Yesus lirni riwra , Yowa Tuna , Ami e matga re .
He said to them , Therefore every scribe who has been made a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a householder , who brings out of his treasure new and old things . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Emkade pede miy emeknekama makwatutu-kwaye ' a Musa deullu-tatarni ida maka kmormior olek la Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu ralamni yoma nat niohora Uplerlawna wniatutnu la ' ululu gahani , me nat niohor walia A wniatut warwua'ru di . Emkade pede miy die emekwalima orroma ida mak kalgota re'eni-tniarnu , de warwuarnu nor wutga gakgakamnu .
When Jesus had finished these parables , he departed from there . ||| La'pa Yesus Nwatia lirni la yawalliohora re honona , noma Nhoitio'or la gen die .
Coming into his own country , he taught them in their synagogue , so that they were astonished and said , Where did this man get this wisdom and these mighty works ? ||| Noma Nawal lia ' E letni-ruhunni . La hande de , Nla ' pa Nwatutu-nwaye'ela gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la . Ne la'pa riy ratlin nana Yesus wniatutnu de , riy honona rwer rer wiawni pa riwra , Ha Nlernana kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou hikmat rilla ' hanmenio ? Ne Ha Nlernan walia plola-mneha pa Nhi ' nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona rilla ' hanmeni walio ?
Is n't this the carpenter 's son ? Is n't his mother called Mary , and his brothers James , Joses , Simon , and Judas ? ||| Itat niohora de makawte'ta-kaprahni id a'nani to ' a Hade pa edonna nhal de Ha inni nwawa Maria , ne hyalli re de Yakowsi , Yusup , Simon nor Yudasa ?
Are n't all of his sisters with us ? Where then did this man get all of these things ? ||| Ne Ha narni patke ' a honona re nek de rden wal lia handi . Ne Ha Nlernan harella la ' hameni ho ' a ?
They were offended by him . But Jesus said to them , A prophet is not without honor , except in his own country and in his own house . ||| La ' emkade pede honona re rwayotlia Yesus . Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka klol meni-meni to ' mana , rira rhu'ru-rhelam la , mere hota la ' letni-ruhunni me luwnu-a'nani meman nek de riy id mana edonna natlin la .
He did n't do many mighty works there because of their unbelief . ||| La ' hade pede Yesus Nhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona ida-woru tio'ola ' hande yoma irakleh pesiay .
At that time , Herod the tetrarch heard the report concerning Jesus , ||| La ' lera-wolla re de Herodes mak kodi plolli la Galilea la'pa natlin nana Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni
and said to his servants , This is John the Baptizer . He is risen from the dead . That is why these powers work in him . ||| dewade nakot la tniutnu-nhianni-nhielli-liarni niwra , Matialo'onama Yohansi mak kharani e inhatti ! Enmati olek pa nmori owa'an pede nhi ' neka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona hya ' to'owa .
For Herod had arrested John , bound him , and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias , his brother Philip 's wife . ||| Enakot emkade yoma la ler ululu la ' a Yohansi nmormior ma'ta de Herodes nhopan pa rtorna Yohansi na'nama rwutga pa rla rwi'it targa la roma nhio'la ralamni . Herodes nhi ' emkade yoma la ' a e hawni Herodias rerieini . Yoma Herodes hawni Herodias de , de Herodes hyalli Pilipsu haw ulullu .
For John said to him , It is not lawful for you to have her . ||| Pede nhi'inde Yohansi nakot la Herodes niwra , Yan memmemna omuora Herodias mmiehlima . Hade edon lol deulu-tatra .
When he would have put him to death , he feared the multitude , because they counted him as a prophet . ||| La ' a plollolli de Herodes niwra nwenna Yohansi mere namta'at rer lia rira yoma rwarora de Yohanis de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id eda de .
But when Herod 's birthday came , the daughter of Herodias danced among them and pleased Herod . ||| La'pa Herodes ler kalwiedni noma Herodias a'nani patke ' a nloi lia makhopnu-makpepna gaini ralamni . Lioini-nhiekni de nla ' nan meman la Herodes ralamni .
Therefore he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask . ||| Nreiniande Herodes nlokar meman la pat harara mak kloi die gaini ralamni pa niwra hota enal hya ' a-hya ' to'ola hararar de wakwakni .
She , being prompted by her mother , said , Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptizer . ||| Nla ' pa natlin la inni yawewalli noma hararar de nakot la Herodes niwra , Tuna , awuak pa mkien tio ' a Yohansi makharani o'tani la totopa , pa muala mai a ' u .
The king was grieved , but for the sake of his oaths and of those who sat at the table with him , he commanded it to be given , and he sent and beheaded John in the prison . ||| La'pa Herodes natlin nana hararar de wakwakni dewade ralamni ntuin doin la . Mere takotpa , nlokar pa lira olek hadewa ne mak kmai pia kor wutga Herodes pa ra'an de ratlin momuoga oleka re . Herodes nhar lirni totpena rla rotan doinia Yohansi makharani die o'tani la ' a roma nhio'la ralamni na'nama rkenia o'tani la totopa pa rma rtemna la hararar de limni .
His head was brought on a platter and given to the young lady , and she brought it to her mother . ||| La'pa edon nalo'on ma'ta de rken nian Yohansi o'tani la totopa ralamni pa rma ralla pat hararar de . Nhor nioma pat hararar de nodia Yohansi o'tani pa nod tiargho ' a la inni .
His disciples came , took the body , and buried it . Then they went and told Jesus . ||| La'pa maklernohor reria Yohansi makharani ratlin nana , noma rma ra'ala Yohansi inonni pa rla rhuwria . Nhor nioka rla ' pa rwahaur nohor momuoga harella Yesus .
Now when Jesus heard this , he withdrew from there in a boat to a deserted place apart . When the multitudes heard it , they followed him on foot from the cities . ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin nana hyalli Yohansi nmati olekwa noma Nhoitio'or la ' hande , ne Nmeh ' a Nha'at la puou pa Nla'awa geni hgalgali ida . Mere la'pa rirahu ratlin nohora de Yesus Nhi ' emkade dewade mak kwatiawua leta-ruhuna re rlidan lol keranni la eni plahwani pa rlernohora Yesus .
Jesus went out , and he saw a great multitude . He had compassion on them and healed their sick . ||| La'pa Yesus Nerun la puou pa namkek la riy rariahu re , de ralamni ntuin doin la pa Niwra Ntulan la ira . Noma Nhi ' kalwieda riy mak kanieni-kahniena mak kden wut lia riy mutlialawna re .
When evening had come , his disciples came to him , saying , This place is deserted , and the hour is already late . Send the multitudes away , that they may go into the villages , and buy themselves food . ||| Ne lera nheria pa mak Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rma rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , lera nheria wa . Ne la ' gen di ho'mana olieta la leta pede Mhuopan nekpa ir orgahani rla rawelia ya'ana-yemnu la ' a leta-leta re .
But Jesus said to them , They do n't need to go away . You give them something to eat . ||| Mere Yesus Nahmen pa Niwra , Pena mialla ra'ana .
They told him , We only have here five loaves and two fish . ||| Noma rwalolla Yesus riwra , Tuna , a wareher mamni ri eneknek to'ama roti deulu wolima , me i'na wor tiututu .
He said , Bring them here to me . ||| Yesus Nakot la re , Miod tieka mmiai !
He commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass , and he took the five loaves and the two fish , and looking up to heaven , he blessed , broke and gave the loaves to the disciples , and the disciples gave to the multitudes . ||| Nhor nia'nama Nhopan pa riy honona re ramtatn apitga la genni la ' wewna wawannu . Noma Yesus Na'ala rot dieulu re wolima , me i'na rora , na'nama Nwatniar la heyanan , pa Na'uli-nawedi Uplerlawna . Na'nama Nhawi-nhawia roti re , me Nwikria i'na re noma Nala la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rdurmu-rhakra la ' a riy mutlialawna re honona .
They all ate and were filled . They took up twelve baskets full of that which remained left over from the broken pieces . ||| Honona re ra'an pa rpehera . Ra'an pa rwair wa , noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , rwaho ' a-rwatierun wa de rawok nana mak ha ra'an atre ' a , de kriou penpuenu termida wehrani woru .
Those who ate were about five thousand men , in addition to women and children . ||| Mak ka'an momuou lia hande , la'pa edon nhal de muanke ' a riwnu wolima , me edonna rhor wut mua'ta la patke ' a ror wutga upni-a'nani .
Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side , while he sent the multitudes away . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhopan pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rodi puou rleretia danau pa rala ' ulia ne Nhopan pa riy mutlialawna re rawal wia .
After he had sent the multitudes away , he went up into the mountain by himself to pray . When evening had come , he was there alone . ||| La'pa honona re rla'awa dewade Yesus Nha'at la wo'ora id hananni totpa Nmemeh ' a Nsumbaini . Yesus Nden nek la hande pa la ' pa mela ndamit nana .
But the boat was now in the middle of the sea , distressed by the waves , for the wind was contrary . ||| Ne tamkek la puou muaka Yesus mutwualli ha rodi re nner pa ed olek la danau letgarni , ne yo'ora-anni mak klol gaini newat nana .
In the fourth watch of the night , Jesus came to them , walking on the sea . ||| La'pa repreparreria de Yesus Nala ' lola tah ' i ulti wawannu pa Nla Nlernohora puou mak oliet olek la E ' a .
When the disciples saw him walking on the sea , they were troubled , saying , It 's a ghost ! and they cried out for fear . ||| La'pa ir honona la puou die ramkek tutga E maimiaini de lola tah ' i ulti wawannu , dewade honona re rhedu noka ramta'at wenna . Rhaun pa riwra , Ee ! Hegan lora nmai niek ee !
But immediately Jesus spoke to them , saying , Cheer up ! It is I ! Do n't be afraid . ||| Mere Yesus Nleretniekla Nakot la re Niwra , Mmiolmiolmi , Yesus A ' g inhatti . Yan mimta'ata .
Peter answered him and said , Lord , if it is you , command me to come to you on the waters . ||| Noma Petrus nakot la , Matroma , la'pa plola pa Yesus O ' a de Mhuopan pa a'ula ' lola tah ' i ulti pa atiy O ' a !
He said , Come ! Peter stepped down from the boat and walked on the waters to come to Jesus . ||| Mmuai ee ! Yesus A ' g hadi . Dewade Petrus nerun la puou na'nama nala ' lola tah ' i ulti pa nla nwatroma Yesus .
But when he saw that the wind was strong , he was afraid , and beginning to sink , he cried out , saying , Lord , save me ! ||| Mere la'pa Petrus namta'at wenna la anni meranni mak kten lia danau de , reiniande Petrus nhudgauriernu , ne nhaun pa niwra , Mtiulan mai a ' u Matrom ee !
Immediately Jesus stretched out his hand , took hold of him , and said to him , You of little faith , why did you doubt ? ||| Noma Yesus Nleretniekla Nhoi limni pa Ntoran reria na'nama niwra , Petrusa o pesiaymu , wekwek ma'ta . Nihya'pa o ralammu worwuoru niohor A ' u ? !
When they got up into the boat , the wind ceased . ||| Noma rrora rha'at rewre'wa la puou ne anin lawan de mana namtie'ela wa .
Those who were in the boat came and worshiped him , saying , You are truly the Son of God ! ||| Noka maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re honona ra'uli-rawedia Yesus . Honona rakot la , Plola , O ' di de Uplerlawna A'nani inhatti !
When they had crossed over , they came to the land of Gennesaret . ||| La ' pa rleretia danau pa rte'ela danau aratni la ' a leta Genesaret .
When the people of that place recognized him , they sent into all that surrounding region and brought to him all who were sick , ||| Ne la'pa makden hande ramkek tut niana mak kmai die Yesus inhatta , dewade rpo'on-rde'et nohora Yesus la leta-leta mak rehgorgoru honona re riwra , Ee Yesus Nmai niek ee ! Noma riy harahu rawoka maka kanieni-kahniena re honona pa rodia la Yesus .
and they begged him that they might just touch the fringe of his garment . As many as touched it were made whole . ||| Mak kodia mak kamehra-kamau re rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni la Yesus pa riwra , Amee ! Ampaka pa makamehra-kamau re rteman to'ola rayanmu tawnu , totpena rkalwieda ! Demade he'-he ' mak kteman nan to ' a rayanni tawnu re , honon rnek pa rler la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem , saying , ||| Lera ida ne Parisi wokni id nor wutga makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re rwatiawu Yerusalem pa rma rwahaka Yesus . Noma ratian Yesus riwra ,
Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders ? For they do n't wash their hands when they eat bread . ||| Nihya'pa riy maka Ompuatutu-mpuaye ' a re rpera-rdaitia it upni-tgarni deullu-tatarni ? ! Ira'an de edonna rohma ulga limni .
He answered them , Why do you also disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Ne hya ' a nrei pia miy mpiera-mdiaitia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , la ' a mtiot nan to ' a upmi-tgarmi deullu-tatarni nanpena mliernohora ? !
For God commanded , ‘ Honor your father and your mother , ' and , ‘ He who speaks evil of father or mother , let him be put to death . ' ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Niwra , Mhiu'ru-mhielam la inmi-ammi , ne la'pa hameni nwohora-ntatra inni-amni , de hota nlernana niukum matmiati .
But you say , ‘ Whoever may tell his father or his mother , Whatever help you might otherwise have gotten from me is a gift devoted to God , ||| Mere mpiatutu-mpiaye ' de edon nhala pa riy id nakot la inni-amni niwra , Agiwa galla miy , mere agal olek la Uplerlawna .
he shall not honor his father or mother . ' You have made the commandment of God void because of your tradition . ||| Emkade pede mhiur niohora riy de , pa hota edon na'unni-namta'ata inni-amni . La ' talan emkade pede miy edon mliernohora Uplerlawna lirni de , mere mliernohor to ' a miy upmi-tgarmi deullu-tatarni .
You hypocrites ! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you , saying , ||| Miy di mtiot pa mpial lia riy plollola mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Hota plol memna la ' lir wowohorni maka Yesaya nakot nohora miy niwra ,
‘ These people draw near to me with their mouth , and honor me with their lips , but their heart is far from me . ||| Emkadilla Uplerlawna lirni , Rimormiori ri eneknek to'ama ral nurnu tutnu ra rha'wa nan to ' A na'nu , mere ralamni re olieta mai A ' u .
And they worship me in vain , teaching as doctrine rules made by men . ' ||| Hare kniola tiernu-niawur nehlani mai A ' die hamamuamua re yoma ira rwatut tio ' a rimormiori wniatutnu-wniaye'eni .
He summoned the multitude , and said to them , Hear , and understand . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Npol lia riy rahu mak kden handi pa rma rawoka ne Nakot la re Niwra , Mitlina totpena miatga .
That which enters into the mouth does n't defile the man , but that which proceeds out of the mouth , this defiles the man . ||| Mak ita'ana edon nhi ' akdieha-aktiahl ita . Eneknek to'ama yatyatni-halalli maka itakot nohora me tsi ' nana . Hade ed maka khi ' pa takdieha-taktiahli .
Then the disciples came and said to him , Do you know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this saying ? ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai pia ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , O e Muat niohora me edonna ? Lira-tun muaka Omukota re de e nheik nana Parisi re nhiolli-lietni pa dodo'ondi de e rawenna .
But he answered , Every plant which my heavenly Father did n't plant will be uprooted . Leave them alone . They are blind guides of the blind . If the blind guide the blind , both will fall into a pit . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni re pa Nakot la re , Hyal miy re , yana mkienia riy Parisi rella nhioratmi . Yoma ir emolmolan nekama yawuli-yatniamin maka A A'mu makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha limni enni atia ' a , pa hota rwuh dioinia la . Ha rhi ' a o'ta-mata mak ktut tialla la riy dom to ' a mere , ha rmeh ' a nekane e rlola melli-kalamni , yoma emeka matni re yata . Ne la'pa riy mat yata ida ntut tialan la mat yat walli , de hota rewre'wa pa rtuin la hu'ula ralamni .
Peter answered him , Explain the parable to us . ||| Petrus nakot la Yesus niwra , Tuna , Mtiulan pa Mukot nohora yawalliohora de nnia'eratni mai ami .
So Jesus said , Do you also still not understand ? ||| Yesus Niwra , Emkameni pede miy edonna miat mua'ta lira re nnia'eratni ? !
Do n't you understand that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the belly and then out of the body ? ||| Miy e miplin mua'ta de mak itlumu-ttella de hota ha nla'awa it apannu ne hota nlergot owa'ana ? !
But the things which proceed out of the mouth come out of the heart , and they defile the man . ||| Mere mak klergot lola it nurnu , de ha nwatiawua it ralamni ne hade ed maka khi ' rira pa rakdieha-raktiahli .
For out of the heart come evil thoughts , murders , adulteries , sexual sins , thefts , false testimony , and blasphemies . ||| Yoma it ihranu ralamni ed mak kodia ralma-rior yotyota-yatyata , pa nhi'nande riy rwunu-rwenna , ralira-raliai , rkamnelu-rkamna ' a , rod niana riy mak khala , la'pa rapolu-raliella rira .
These are the things which defile the man , but to eat with unwashed hands does n't defile the man . ||| Hare er maka khi ' rira pa rakdieha-raktiahli ne edon riwra it edonna tohma ma'ta it limni pa ta'ana de hota nodi it la kdeha-ktiahli .
Jesus went out from there and withdrew into the region of Tyre and Sidon . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhoitio'or la ' gen die , ne Nla'awa leta Tirus nora Sidon yapatni .
Behold , a Canaanite woman came out from those borders and cried , saying , Have mercy on me , Lord , you son of David ! My daughter is severely possessed by a demon ! ||| Patke ' a Kana'an ida nwatiawu hande pa nma nwahaka Yesus , ne nmai die nhaun lola niwra , Matroma , ray Daud upni-a'nani nee , Mtiulla-msiayn nan a ' g ee ! A a'nu patke ' a hegana e rhu'ru ralma pa nler la polpuol inni-wakwak amni .
But he answered her not a word . His disciples came and begged him , saying , Send her away , for she cries after us . ||| Mere Yesus edonna Nwahla nana patke ' de lirni . Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai pia rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , Mhuopan pa patke ' de nla'awa . Hade e nmemeh ' a nekpa npeha retlia it to'orni di .
But he answered , I was n't sent to anyone but the lost sheep of the house of Israel . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la patke ' de Niwra , Uplerlawna Nhopna Amuai di , de Nhorat la riy Israel maka kler la klieratni , emeka duma ida mak kawlar dioinia matromni . A ' g edon Muai lia mak Israel atia ' re rerieini .
But she came and worshiped him , saying , Lord , help me . ||| Pat de nmai pia nwaltior la Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama niwra , Matrom ee , Mtiulan nan mai a ' u ee !
But he answered , It is not appropriate to take the children 's bread and throw it to the dogs . ||| Yesus Nnairi yawalliohora pa Nakot la , Ine ! Taken niana ra'ala papay ya'anni-yemannu pa rhopliala ahu gaini , ina .
But she said , Yes , Lord , but even the dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their masters ' table . ||| Noma patke ' de nakot la Yesus niwra , Plola , plola Matroma . Mere ahu mana na'an walia yamanan lu'wu mak ktuin la matromni meini nayanni .
Then Jesus answered her , Woman , great is your faith ! Be it done to you even as you desire . And her daughter was healed from that hour . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la patke ' de Niwra , Ina , o pesiaymu e naruri . Emkade nek la ' a hya ' ed maka o ralammu nwaka . Mtatande nekpa patke ' de a'nani nkalwied wa .
Jesus departed from there and came near to the sea of Galilee , and he went up on the mountain and sat there . ||| Noma Yesus Nhoitio'or la gen die na'nama Nawloh nohora eni la danau Galilea . Nhor nioma Nla ' pa Nha'at la wo'ora id hananni pa Namtatna .
Great multitudes came to him , having with them the lame , blind , mute , maimed , and many others , and they put them down at his feet . He healed them , ||| Riy rahu rmai pia rodia mak kala ' waini-waini , mak matni kyata , mak lakni kmati , mak kaplinu kaltieri , me mak kamehra-kamau harahu wali . Rhoi tiaru-retar targa hare honona la Yesus gaini ralamni dewade Nhi ' rpa rkalwied momuou .
so that the multitude wondered when they saw the mute speaking , the injured healed , the lame walking , and the blind seeing-and they glorified the God of Israel . ||| Riy honona makden la hande , rwer rer wiawni la'pa ramkek tutga mak kaplinu kaltieri re raltieri , mak lakni kmati me mak kala ' waini-waini re rarur wia pa rala ' a wa , mak matni kyata re ramkek wa , dewade mak kden hande honona ra'uli-rawedia makden Israel re Uplerlawanni .
Jesus summoned his disciples and said , I have compassion on the multitude , because they have continued with me now three days and have nothing to eat . I do n't want to send them away fasting , or they might faint on the way . ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Npol lia maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rma rawoka na'nama Niwra , A ralmu ntuin doin la ' rimormior miutlialawna ri . Hari e rlernohor rer A lia lera wotelu mere ha rakleha yamanna . A ' g edonna ga ' pua golin doin hare pa rla ' de apannu rahgali . Yanhi'pa gaini rmokal lol talan letgara .
The disciples said to him , Where could we get so many loaves in a deserted place as to satisfy so great a multitude ? ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana , La ' a gen hgal di de hota itlernana yamanan la hanmeni , pa itala la riy mutlialawna ri ra'ana ? !
Jesus said to them , How many loaves do you have ? They said , Seven , and a few small fish . ||| La ' a wareher genmi , rot wo'ir erla ? Noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Roti erla , mere eneknek wo'itu tiututu , me temtemanni i'na prowta ida-woru .
He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground , ||| Noma Yesus Nhopan pa riy mutlialawna re rakpernernia la tani wawannu .
and he took the seven loaves and the fish . He gave thanks and broke them , and gave to the disciples , and the disciples to the multitudes . ||| Dewade Yesus Na'ala roti mieha re wo'itu nor wutga i'na re na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna . Nhor nia'nama Nhawi-nhawia re pa Nala la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhakre'era la rimormioria niutni-mdierna re .
They all ate and were filled . They took up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left over . ||| Honona re ra'an pa rpehera , na'nama maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwaho ' a-rwatierun de rlernana maka ha ra'an atre ' a , de kriou penpuenu wo'itu .
Those who ate were four thousand men , in addition to women and children . ||| Rhor momuoga muanke ' mak ka'ana re de riy riwnu wogata . Ne edonna rhor nohor ma'ta patke ' a mak kor wutga upni-a'nani .
Then he sent away the multitudes , got into the boat , and came into the borders of Magdala . ||| Nhorwua dewade Yesus Nhopan pa honona rawal lia ' genni-tienni . Ne Yesus Nha'at la puou pa rla'awa Magadan yapatni .
The Pharisees and Sadducees came , and testing him , asked him to show them a sign from heaven . ||| Lera ida ne riy Parisi ror wutga riy Saduki dom pa rma rtota Yesus la klieratni . Noma rhopan pa Yesus Ntutga hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona id totpena irat muemna de Yesus plolli-mneheni nwatiawua Uplerlawna .
But he answered them , When it is evening , you say , ‘ It will be fair weather , for the sky is red . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La'pa lera nhi'pa ntopal la tah ' i , noma miwra repar de otna edonan nturu yoma lyanti yamkekni nmera-nlairi .
In the morning , ‘ It will be foul weather today , for the sky is red and threatening . ' Hypocrites ! You know how to discern the appearance of the sky , but you ca n't discern the signs of the times ! ||| Ne la ' ler dom de la'pa yawyawar ma'ta demade lyanti yamkekni nmera-nlairi , mere nayawowta , de miwra hota otna ntur lia ler di , yoma lyanti nayawowta . Miatu mikwiet nana hota lera id de otna nturu me edonna , onnila mimkek la lyanti wowta-kakamni onde mounu-wahrani . Mere A wniatu'tu me hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka Aghi ' nan oleka la ' lera-mela ri , de ta'en niana mnia'erit nan walia .
An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign , and there will be no sign given to it , except the sign of the prophet Jonah . He left them and departed . ||| Adoh ! Tuwu di , de rimormiori yatyata-halala mak kahmena kpesiay A ' u . Mhiopan pa Aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona totpena mpiesiaya . Mere hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona kuku ' nek ho'mana , A ' g edon tiutga tiy miy ! Eneknek to'ama mak makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yunus ha nlernan de . La'pa Nakot emkade dewade Nto'or ir la hande pa Nla'awa .
The disciples came to the other side and had forgotten to take bread . ||| La'pa Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rte'ela ' danau walli , na'nama honona rheduma , yoma rhoratdoinia roti pa edonna rod wialia .
Jesus said to them , Take heed and beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hyalia , mhioratreria ! Hota miy ererma la ' a tgo ' a Parisi rora Saduki .
They reasoned among themselves , saying , We brought no bread . ||| La'pa ratlin nana Yesus lirni de dewade idma nakot la ida riwra , Nakot emkade yoma ita edonna todia roti .
Jesus , perceiving it , said , Why do you reason among yourselves , you of little faith , because you have brought no bread ? ||| Yesus Nat niohora hya ' ed maka ha rakotkota pede Nakot la re , Nihya'pa miakokan nohora roti hadamonna ? ! Pesiaymi edon naruri mia'ta .
Do n't you yet perceive or remember the five loaves for the five thousand , and how many baskets you took up , ||| Miy ralma-riormi edonna nla ' nan ma'ta ? ! Miy edonna mhioratnan ma'ta la ' lera maka Aghawierie'er roti wolima pa Agaitiutur nana riy riwnu wolim dewade miy orgahami miwok nan korni kriou penpuenu re , maka ha ra'an atre ' a ? !
or the seven loaves for the four thousand , and how many baskets you took up ? ||| Miy edonna mhioratnan walia rot mieha wo'itu maka Agala tiutria riy riwnu wogata dewade miwok rehenu de kriou penpuenu re ? !
How is it that you do n't perceive that I did n't speak to you concerning bread ? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees . ||| Ne la ' a hya ' ed mak kriei pia miy edonna mnia'erit nana A li'ru , la ' a A ' g edonna muakokan nohora rot miaka ha miakokan nohora re ? ! Mere A'ukot nohora tiy miy die , nhiorta la ' temmi la ' tgo ' riy Parisi rora riy Saduki re .
Then they understood that he did n't tell them to beware of the yeast of bread , but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees . ||| Yesus Nakot emkadewa na'nama maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rat niohora , E edonna Ntut tiarga lir della ' tgo ' a maka ha rawnyah ' a la roti mak kreiniande rot die nha'ata , mere Hade e ntarg hadella la ' a riy Saduki rora riy Parisi wniatutnu-wniaye'eni mak kreiniande riy rahu rler la klieratni .
Now when Jesus came into the parts of Caesarea Philippi , he asked his disciples , saying , Who do men say that I , the Son of Man , am ? ||| Yesus Nor mutwualli re rla ' a gen mak edon oliet la Kaisarea Pilipi . La hande noma Enatiana mutwualli mak ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Nhi'inde riy e riwra Rimormiori A'na A ' die he ' o ?
They said , Some say John the Baptizer , some , Elijah , and others , Jeremiah or one of the prophets . ||| Noma mutwualli re rwet la riwra , Tuna , riy dom de riwra Yohansi makharani O ' a , mak kmori owa'ana , dom de riwra makwohorulu-ktatrulu Elia . Dom de riwra makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yermia O ' a onde makwohorulu-ktatrulu dom to ' a .
He said to them , But who do you say that I am ? ||| Noka Yesus Natian owa'ana , Mere A'utian tek miy . La ' miy wniarormi de , A ' di de he ' A ' u ?
Simon Peter answered , You are the Christ , the Son of the living God . ||| Noma Simon Petrus nwet la , Matro'mu de , Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu maka kden pa nodi liarni , A'nani . O ' di de Ray mak kodi mormiori-lewlewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru Mesias O inhatti !
Jesus answered him , Blessed are you , Simon Bar Jonah , for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you , but my Father who is in heaven . ||| Yesus Nwahla Niwra , Petrusa , Yunus a'nani o ' a , omliernana unut lawna yoma A A'mu mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nmeh ' a nek ed maka kwe'era tiy o ' a de A ' di de Uplerlawna A'nani maka Nano'taru , yoma wniarora-wnialai die edon nwatiawu eti lia rimormiori nohkeran di .
I also tell you that you are Peter , and on this rock I will build my assembly , and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it . ||| Nanmu de Petrus nnia'eratni de watu muetam kerna . A'ukot hadi totpa muatga , riy maka pesiayni naruri emekwali pesiaymu de hota rwal lia A mu'tu-rah ' u . Emkade pede o ' emeknekama watu maka ha rariria roma-lewu la ' a wawannu totpa taken niana nlitri . Ne hota matmiati ho'mana taken niana rodi A mu'tu-rah ' u re la yawa .
I will give to you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven , and whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven , and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven . ||| Hota A ' g ed maka tiemna konsi mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna lodanni-hairni la o limmu ralamni pa hya ' maka omliaran la mai nohkeran di wawannu de hota Uplerlawna mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nwayow nohora . Ne la'pa ompuayow nan hadella noha wawannu , de hota Uplerlawna Nwayow nan wali hade .
Then he commanded the disciples that they should tell no one that he was Jesus the Christ . ||| La'pa Nakot emkade pa nhorwua dewade Yesus Nwagahniorta maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re totpena yan memmemna rwahaur nohor E ' a la ' a riy , riwra E ' de Ray miak kodia mormiori-lewlewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa .
From that time , Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders , chief priests , and scribes , and be killed , and the third day be raised up . ||| La ' ler de de pa nodi liarni Yesus Nwe'er doin meman la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , de Uplerlawna ralma-riorni totpena Nla ' pa hota ntutu-nte'ela Yerusalem de Entutulu-nlelewua kropna-krieutu , yamuki-yama'ala yoma la ' a ina-ama Yahudi ror wutga imam-imam o'tani-matni me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama . Uplerlawna Nala pa hota rwen E ' a mere hota nodia lera wotellu owa'an de Uplerlawna Namori owa'an E la matmiatni ralamni .
Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him , saying , Far be it from you , Lord ! This will never be done to you . ||| Noma Petrus nheduma pa nte'la la Yesus pa rla'awa walli na'nama npolliohora Yesus pa nakot la , Matroma , awuakwak de Uplerlawna Nter dioini-nhal doinia mak Omukot de !
But he turned and said to Peter , Get behind me , Satan ! You are a stumbling block to me , for you are not setting your mind on the things of God , but on the things of men . ||| Hya ' maka Petrus rakota de edon nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pede Yesus Nkillia Petrus na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Eh , mlia'awa walli hega'nu ne ! Yana mhi ' a yawuhi-yawe'et la A ' u . Petrus , la'pa mukot emkade de mliernohora hegana amlawanni pa miwra mtiot nek A lia klieratni . La'pa omiwra hota A ' g edon lier la yamuki-yama'ala de wniarormu de wniarora rimormioria de . Wniaror de edonna nwatiawua Uplerlawna .
Then Jesus said to his disciples , If anyone desires to come after me , let him deny himself , take up his cross , and follow me . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nakot la mak ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Hyal miy re , mitlina . Riy meni mak kiwra klernohora A ' u , de nhoratdoinia momuoga hya ' ed maka e ralamni nod rer lia , ne nre ' wut lia A ' pua nler la yamuki-yama'ala onde matmiati pa emolmolan nekama nhoi wawayanni la auwlakra pa nlernohor A ' u .
For whoever desires to save his life will lose it , and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it . ||| Yoma la'pa hameni maka edon nhoratdoinia mormiorni noh di wawannu de hota e ' edon nler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Mere la'pa riy maka khoratdoinia mormiorni la noh di wawannu , de hota nlernana mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world and forfeits his life ? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life ? ||| La'pa riy mak klernana nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu honona mere hota edonna nlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni , de hota re'eni-tniarnu re nodi untu hya ' la ' riy dena ? ! Nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu honona , ta'en niana nawel niana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de mai rimormiori ita toh !
For the Son of Man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels , and then he will give to everyone according to his deeds . ||| Hyalmi re , mial ralammi tetema pa mliernohor A ' u yoma hota la ' ler noha niatni de Rimormiori A'na A ' die gor wutga Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu ammai die Agodia A A'mu plolli-mneheni . Hota la ' ler de Amuai pia Awuahla rima-rima hihi'ini-yapyapni maka rhi ' nana oleka wa .
Most certainly I tell you , there are some standing here who will in no way taste of death until they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom . ||| Mhioratreria ! Hota la ' a miy hononmi la handi de riy dom de mak edonna rmati mia'ta mere hota ramkek ulu Rimormiori A'na A ' u mak ktorna-krautia lodna-hairi maimia'yu .
After six days , Jesus took with him Peter , James , and John his brother , and brought them up into a high mountain by themselves . ||| Noma la'pa lera wonema rlardoinla noma Yesus Nodia Petrus nor Yakowsi me hyalli Yohansi pa rmeh ' a rla'awa wo'or tutulu id hananni .
He was changed before them . His face shone like the sun , and his garments became as white as the light . ||| La'pa rwatniar temna Yesus de gaini to'ama . Yesus gaini emeknekama lera mak kreprepra me naniayarni liplipa-kamka'ma .
Behold , Moses and Elijah appeared to them talking with him . ||| Plin-plinnianamde maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramkek nan walia Musa , Elia , rora Yesus rwahauru .
Peter answered and said to Jesus , Lord , it is good for us to be here . If you want , let 's make three tents here , one for you , one for Moses , and one for Elijah . ||| Noma Petrus nakot la Yesus Niwra , Matroma , itden la handi de samoga , pa hota Matroma Nwayowa , de a'uriria hoiwiali wotel lia handi totpena id la Matro'mu , id la Musa , ne id wal lia Elia .
While he was still speaking , behold , a bright cloud overshadowed them . Behold , a voice came out of the cloud , saying , This is my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased . Listen to him . ||| La'pa Petrusa naltiertier mia'ta dewade kakam lawn ida mak khita-krepra npupun nana re noka ratlin nana lira ida nwatiawua kakam de ralamni pa niwra , A A'nu maka Asiayn memna inhatti . E ' ed maka khi ' nana A ralmu pa nahepru . Mitlin la E lirni .
When the disciples heard it , they fell on their faces , and were very afraid . ||| La'pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratlina lir de dewade honona re rwaltiora-rwaltieman la tani wawannu yoma ramta'at wenna .
Jesus came and touched them and said , Get up , and do n't be afraid . ||| Mere Yesus Nmai pia Nkamit la re pa Niwra , Hyal miy re , Yan mimta'ata , mipriri !
Lifting up their eyes , they saw no one , except Jesus alone . ||| La'pa rkillia walli-walli mere edonna ramkek nana riy doma , eneknek to'ama Yesus Nmeh ' a .
As they were coming down from the mountain , Jesus commanded them , saying , Do n't tell anyone what you saw , until the Son of Man has risen from the dead . ||| La'pa rwatiawua wo'ora pa rerun wa noma la ' a talla ralamni de Yesus Nano ' a re Niwra , La ' de yan memmemna mikotkot nohora hya ' a maka mimkeka re la ' a riy . Mpiei niekpa nte'ela lerni mak Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota ramori A lia matmiati ralamni .
His disciples asked him , saying , Then why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first ? ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana riwra , Hya ' a nrei pia makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re e riwra hota Elia nmai ulu nampena Ray maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar pua Namori-nalewna rimormiori Nmai ?
Jesus answered them , Elijah indeed comes first , and will restore all things , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Plola Elia nmai ulu pa nwaho ' a-nwatiernia hare honona .
but I tell you that Elijah has come already , and they did n't recognize him , but did to him whatever they wanted to . Even so the Son of Man will also suffer by them . ||| Mere A'ukot tar tiy miy . Elia nmai olekwa mere riy id ho'mana edonna nat niohora de , ne irlernohora ir ralam wamueheni pa rhi ' yatyat e ' a . Ne hota rhi ' a emkade wal lia ' Rimormior A'na A ' pua Alier la kropna-krieutu , yamuki-yama'ala , nniahora-nniala ' a .
Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the Baptizer . ||| Dewade maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rat niohor oleka Yesus lirni la ' a Elia mak kmai olek de , de nnia'eratni Yohansi makharani .
When they came to the multitude , a man came to him , kneeling down to him and saying , ||| La'pa Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re wotelu rawal pia rla rler teman la riy rariahu re , noma muanke ' ida nma nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Yesus gaini ralamni .
Lord , have mercy on my son , for he is epileptic and suffers grievously , for he often falls into the fire , and often into the water . ||| Nma nakot la niwra , Tuna , Mtiulla-msiayn nan la a a'nu yoma enapiphyaya'ala . Nler la polpuol inni-wakwak amni yoma la ' a hegana-kawnu nhu'ru ralma pa nhi'inde e ntuin la ai ralamni onde la ' gera ralamni .
So I brought him to your disciples , and they could not cure him . ||| Agodi oleka la maka A'mu ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a mere ir takeni ratowar nana rhokar doinia .
Jesus answered , Faithless and perverse generation ! How long will I be with you ? How long will I bear with you ? Bring him here to me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakota Niwra , Hoi , Miy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala me mak kakleha pesiay . Hota lera wo'ir owa'an pa Agor miy tialla me Agod niohor miy , nanpena mimpiesiay A ' u ? ! Miodia keke'en de mmiai !
Jesus rebuked the demon , and it went out of him , and the boy was cured from that hour . ||| Dewade Yesus Nhokar doinia hegana-kawnu mak khu'ru ralma pa la ' ler de meman pa keke'en de nkalwied wa .
Then the disciples came to Jesus privately , and said , Why were n't we able to cast it out ? ||| Nhorwua dewade maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rla ' pa rora Yesus rmemeh ' a la ' gen ida na'nama ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , hya ' nrei piede taken niana amhokar doinia hegana-kawun della ?
He said to them , Because of your unbelief . For most certainly I tell you , if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed , you will tell this mountain , ‘ Move from here to there , ' and it will move , and nothing will be impossible for you . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Yoma mikleh pesiay . Mhioratreria , la'pa miy pesiaymi de kuku ' a emeknekama sasawi ola ida ho'mana de hota mikot la wo'or di pa nwarei genni de hota nwarei genni . Ne la'pa miy pesiaymi etla , de hya ' to ' mana hota miy e mhi ' nana .
But this kind does n't go out except by prayer and fasting . ||| Mere eneknek to'ama miy e mitahan lara me msiumbain pleini , nanpena mliernana plolli-mneheni pa mhiokar doinia hegana-kawnu mak emkadi .
While they were staying in Galilee , Jesus said to them , The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men , ||| La'pa Yesus Nor wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rawok tar lia ' Galilea , noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Rimormiori A'nani A ' die , hota ral A lia rimormiori limni ralamni .
and they will kill him , and the third day he will be raised up . They were exceedingly sorry . ||| Ne rwen A ' u mere hota Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna owa'an A lia matmiati ralamni , la ' a lera wotellu . La'pa honona ratlin nana Yesus lirni de dewade rleretniekla ralamni rmawal doin la .
When they had come to Capernaum , those who collected the didrachma coins came to Peter , and said , Does n't your teacher pay the didrachma ? ||| La'pa Yesus Nora talanwalli maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rte'ela leta Kapernaum noma mak kwahora krei yuranni re rmai pia ratiana Petrus riwra , O tungkurmu de nhi'inde Nala yuranni la krei toh ? !
He said , Yes . When he came into the house , Jesus anticipated him , saying , What do you think , Simon ? From whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tribute ? From their children , or from strangers ? ||| Noma Petrus nwalolla , Yopme ! Nhi'inde Npairia . La'pa Petrus nmai lia roma nayanni pa edon nakot ma'ta krei yuranni dewade Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Petrusa , emkameni la o ralma-riormu ? Hota he ' ed maka ray-ray nohkeran di rhopan pa rpairi blastena ? Ir mutnu-rahanu onde do'ona-dakna ?
Peter said to him , From strangers . Jesus said to him , Therefore the children are exempt . ||| Petrus niwra , Do'ona-dakna . Yesus Niwra , Hade emkade demade yana itpair nek wa yoma ir mutnu-rahanu ita .
But , lest we cause them to stumble , go to the sea , cast a hook , and take up the first fish that comes up . When you have opened its mouth , you will find a stater coin . Take that , and give it to them for me and you . ||| Mere totpena yanpa ralamni re ramehra yoma it edon tpairi , pede mlia mnia'aili la danau de . Mu'ala kupan makdella i'n maka mliernan ul die wawni ralamni , ne hota mliernana dirham wogata . Kupan dirham de hota ntu'tu pa muala pa mla mpuairia itro ' a yuranni la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini .
In that hour the disciples came to Jesus , saying , Who then is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven ? ||| La ' ler de de maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai pia ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , hota he ' ed maka inponni kreh dioini la ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak kmormior lia Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu ralamni ?
Jesus called a little child to himself , and set him in the middle of them ||| Noma Yesus Npol lia keke'enku ' ida na'nama Nala pa ntutrier lia ir honona gaini ralamni .
and said , Most certainly I tell you , unless you turn and become as little children , you will in no way enter into the Kingdom of Heaven . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mhioratreria , eneknek to'ama mhiernu nhiolmi-lietmi me mpiali owa'an emekneka keke'enku ' a mak klol yawa , de hota miy edon mrie ' wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re .
Whoever therefore humbles himself as this little child is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven . ||| Hade pede he ' mak katu klol yawa pa emeknekama keke'enku ' a di , hota riy de ed mak karehi-kalawan la ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu ralamni .
Whoever receives one such little child in my name receives me , ||| Ne la'pa he ' ed mak edon katulu-kapetan inonni me nreiniana-na'nana riy mak kakleha weli emolmolan nekama keke'enku ' di , onnila A rerie'yu , de emekwalima e nreinian olek A wua .
but whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble , it would be better for him if a huge millstone were hung around his neck and that he were sunk in the depths of the sea . ||| Mere la'pa he ' ed mak kariei pia riy mak kakleha weli emeknekama keke'enku ' di pa edonna rpesiay owa'an mai A ' u , de Uplerlawna niukamnu la ' riy de nareh dioin meman la'pa riy rkohg watga werwerta id la e tiernu totpa ntepar wenna la hletan lawna .
Woe to the world because of occasions of stumbling ! For it must be that the occasions come , but woe to that person through whom the occasion comes ! ||| Inee ! Hota nohkeran di nler la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani yoma totota-wudwiudi yapi ' u-yaga ' u mak kodi riy la do ' a-hala ralamni . Meman neka la totota-wudwiudi yapi ' u-yaga ' u honona erla , mere hota he ' mak knairia hare pa ntota riy la do ' a-hala ralamni , de riy de ed mak kler la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani .
If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble , cut it off and cast it from you . It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled , rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire . ||| La'pa limmi-lakmi ed mak kodi miy lia do ' a-hala de mdieul dioinia la pa misrala . Yanpa miodi limmi-lakmi re tetema pa rnakulta'ru la ai mormiori ralamni mak ta'eni rwarum nana . Samomuounu de miod lima-lak memehemi re pa mior tieman Uplerlawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
If your eye causes you to stumble , pluck it out and cast it from you . It is better for you to enter into life with one eye , rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire . ||| Ne la'pa miy matmi ed mak kariei pia mlier la do ' a-hala ralamni de mkiopil doinia la'pa mhiopliala . Yanpa matmi rora tetema pa rnaklia miy lia ai mormiori ralamni . Samomuounu de miod nieka matmi id pa mior tieman la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
See that you do n't despise one of these little ones , for I tell you that in heaven their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven . ||| Hyal miy re , mitlina , yan memmemna mpiarwah ' a makpesiaya A ' u maka nhiolli-lietni de emeknekama keke'enku ' a mak kakleha weli . Mhioratreria , yan mhi ' emkade yoma Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat mak katiaka ira , nhi'inde rtutrier lia A A'mu Uplerlawna gaini ralamni la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa rwak pa Uplerlawna Ntulan la ira .
For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost . ||| Me Rimormiori A'na A ' die Amuai totpena A'umori-ulewna rimormiori la ' a do'oni-halli ralamni . Ir emolmolan neka duma mak kawlar dioinia matromni .
What do you think ? If a man has one hundred sheep , and one of them goes astray , does n't he leave the ninety-nine , go to the mountains , and seek that which has gone astray ? ||| Emkameni la miy wniarormi ? La'pa riy ida hanni pipdiuma rahu ida , noma ida nmolu de hota emkameni la makhuri-kwa'an de hihi'ini-yapyapni ? Nahmenmen nana , nteman targa pipdiumni terampwosiewa wehrani wosiewa re la ' a wo'ora pa rwahak wewna pa ra'ana , ne nla nahak memna dum memeh mak kmol die .
If he finds it , most certainly I tell you , he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which have not gone astray . ||| Ne la'pa nlernana mak kmol die de plol toto ' pa hota nahepur nohora dum memeh de , ne la ' ler de edonna nhoratnana dum rariahu mak edonna kmolu re .
Even so it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish . ||| De hade emekwalima miy Amlawanmi mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , hota Nahmen meman pa riy rler la klieratni . Mak kakleh weli emekneka keke'enku ' a re ho'mana edonna .
If your brother sins against you , go , show him his fault between you and him alone . If he listens to you , you have gained back your brother . ||| La'pa miy mutwualmi makpesiay ida nhi ' a do ' a-hal tiy miy , de mlia ' pa miora riy de mikot nohora do'oni-halli mak ha nhi ' a , de yana riy ratga . La'pa enwayow nohora hya ' a maka ha mikota la e ' a , de hota miy e miple'er olekwa .
But if he does n't listen , take one or two more with you , that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established . ||| Mere la'pa edonna natlin la miy lirmi de mior owa'an riy ida onde wor pua mlia ' a . Yoma la ' a Puka ralamni e niwra hota riy ida onde woru rtutrier niohor miy nanpena mtiut halli de naplola .
If he refuses to listen to them , tell it to the assembly . If he refuses to hear the assembly also , let him be to you as a Gentile or a tax collector . ||| Mere la'pa edonna nwayow nana hare lirni-tunnu demade mikot nohora halli la makpesiay wokni-le'enu . Ne la'awa hohoni pa edonna nwayow nan wal lia makpesiay wokni-le'enu , de yana miora mpiahaur wutu pa emeknekama nhi'inde miy mhi ' a la mak kawoka blastena me riy mak kaplin niohora Uplerlawna .
Most certainly I tell you , whatever things you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven , and whatever things you release on earth will have been released in heaven . ||| Mhioratreria , hya ' maka mliaran la nohkerna wawannu , de Uplerlawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha ed mak kwayow nohor walia hade . Ne hya ' maka mpiayow nohora la ' nohkeran di de hota Uplerlawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nwayow nohor walia hade .
Again , assuredly I tell you , that if two of you will agree on earth concerning anything that they will ask , it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven . ||| Totpa miatga la ' nohkeran di wawannu de la'pa riy woru rna'ohma la ' hadom wawannu pa rsumbain nohora , de hota A Amlawnu mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nreiniana-na'nana sniumbain de pa hota Nwahla .
For where two or three are gathered together in my name , there I am in the middle of them . ||| Yoma la ' meni to ' pa riy woru-wotelu rawok pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla la'pa rwet la A na'nu , de A ' g e rie ' wal lia mtatan de .
Then Peter came and said to him , Lord , how often shall my brother sin against me , and I forgive him ? Until seven times ? ||| La ' noma Petrus nmai pia nakot la Yesus Niwra , Matroma , la'pa a'mu-hya'lu i'nu-na'ru rhi ' do ' a-ryap hial nan memna re'eni wo'ir la mai a ' die , noma aghoratdoinia do'oni-halli , hota aghoratdoinia do'oni-halli la'pa re'eni wo'it muemna ?
Jesus said to him , I do n't tell you until seven times , but , until seventy times seven . ||| Yesus Nakot la , Edon emkade ! Yoma edonna ntut tio'ola re'eni wo'itu mere lera-lera nekpa mhuoratdoinia e do'oni-halli . La'pa ntut lia re'eni terampwo'itu nti'il nana la re'eni wo'itu mana , hota mhuoratdoini e do'oni-halli la o ' a .
Therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants . ||| Yoma hota la'pa Uplerlawna Ntorna-nrautu la mutnu-rahanu mormiorni , de hota emeknekama wniahauru la ' a yawalliohor di . De la'pa ray ida niwra nwatetar nohora hopopanni-lili'irnu re otanni-arni .
When he had begun to settle , one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents . ||| Demade rodia hopopna maka otanni-arni riwnu-halli .
But because he could n't pay , his lord commanded him to be sold , with his wife , his children , and all that he had , and payment to be made . ||| Mere hopopan de taken niana npairi ahorga . Pede ray die nhopan pa ra'ol dioinia hopopna-lili'ir di nor wutga hawni-a'nani nor wut wualia hyonni-hyanni totpena ra rhernia otanni-arni re .
The servant therefore fell down and knelt before him , saying , ‘ Lord , have patience with me , and I will repay you all ! ' ||| Noma hopopan de nuh ' idma-nrama lia'ar la ray die , na'nama nwak la niwra , Matroma , awuak lilili-mamuau tiy o ' a pa muala lera-mela mai a ' u totpena apuair nana a otnu-a'ru re honona .
The lord of that servant , being moved with compassion , released him and forgave him the debt . ||| Noma ray die ralamni ntuin doin nohora hopopan de wakwakni pa nhi'nande nhap dioinia hopopan de otanni-arni honona , ne nolin doinia pa nla'awa .
But that servant went out and found one of his fellow servants who owed him one hundred denarii , and he grabbed him and took him by the throat , saying , ‘ Pay me what you owe ! ' ||| La'pa hopopan de nlergot wa , noka nwatrom nana e kniarwialli id maka na'otna dinar rahg ida la e ' a . Onnila kupna oke ' nmeh ' a de pede nrahmia maka otan de tiernu pa nakot la , Hoi , mpuairia otanmu re mai a ' u !
So his fellow servant fell down at his feet and begged him , saying , ‘ Have patience with me , and I will repay you ! ' ||| Noma maka otan de nuh ' idma-nrama lia'ar la , na'nama nwak lir la niwra , Heiwialia , awuak lilili-mamuau tiy o ' a totpena mpuei pia repra-walin nanpena agherun momuoga re .
He would not , but went and cast him into prison until he should pay back that which was due . ||| Mere hopopan de nwayotli kniarwialli de wakwakni pa nreiniande nla nho'la targa la roma nhio'la ralamni , pa la'pa npair dioinia otanni re honona .
So when his fellow servants saw what was done , they were exceedingly sorry , and came and told their lord all that was done . ||| Mere la'pa hopopan de kniarwialli dom wal pia ramkek nana hihi ' a-yapyap die , de ralamni rtuin doin la pa nreiniande rla rakot momuoga la ' a ray .
Then his lord called him in and said to him , ‘ You wicked servant ! I forgave you all that debt because you begged me . ||| Noma ray nhopan pa rpolga hopopan maka yatyata-halal de na'nama nakot la niwra , Hoi riy yatya'tu ne , ompuak lir mai a ' puede agal o ' pa yana mpuairia otanmu re .
Should n't you also have had mercy on your fellow servant , even as I had mercy on you ? ' ||| Mere o ralammu edonna nolin doin nohora o kniarwialmu de wakwakni tiy o ' a pa emekwalima aghi ' a tiy o ' de ? !
His lord was angry , and delivered him to the tormentors until he should pay all that was due to him . ||| Pa reiniande ray die nahankerna , pa nhopan pa rken tiargho ' a hopopan ralam yatyat della roma nhio'la ralamni totpena mak katiaka roma nhio'la ramuki-rama'ala pa la'pa npair nana momuoga otanni-arni honona .
So my heavenly Father will also do to you , if you do n't each forgive your brother from your hearts for his misdeeds . ||| Pede hyalmi re mitlina ! Hota hya ' maka ray die nhi ' a la hopopan ralam yatyat de , emekwalia A A'mu makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha hihi'ini-yapyapni tiy miy , la'pa miy edon mhioratdoinia rimormior wialmi do'oni-halli tiy miy .
When Jesus had finished these words , he departed from Galilee and came into the borders of Judea beyond the Jordan . ||| La'pa Yesus Nwahaur nohor momuoga hare honona noma Nwatitin la Galilea yapatni pa Nla'awa Yudea yapatni la ' gerlawna Yordan walli .
Great multitudes followed him , and he healed them there . ||| Riy rahu rlernohora reria Yesus pede Yesus Nhi ' kalwieda ir la nnienni-nhienni .
Pharisees came to him , testing him and saying , Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason ? ||| Noma riy Parisi rmai lia hande pa rtota-rwudia . Ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , it agamni deullu-tatarni niwra riy rhopliala hawni patke ' a de rlernohora neka ir ralma-rior wamueheni ?
He answered , Have n't you read that he who made them from the beginning made them male and female , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hoi , miy edonna mpiaik nan ma'ta la Puka ralamni de enakot nohora la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayapi nohkerna ? ! E ed maka khi ' a-kyap niana rimormiori , de muanke ' a nora patke ' a .
and said , ‘ For this cause a man shall leave his father and mother , and shall be joined to his wife , and the two shall become one flesh ' ? ||| E rhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni la ' Puka ralamni de Niwra , La hade pede hota a'na muanke ' a ida naltarga inni-amni pa la nora hawni patke ' a rla ' wutg ida totpa rla ' ihyida-ralmida .
So that they are no more two , but one flesh . What therefore God has joined together , do n't let man tear apart . ||| Nhi'nande hare de riy worg atia ' a , mere riy id to ' a . La hade pede la ' a patke ' a rora muanke ' a maka Uplerlawna Nwatiehra oleka , de yan memmemna riy ida ntota pa nreiyapie'era .
They asked him , Why then did Moses command us to give her a certificate of divorce and divorce her ? ||| Noma riy Parisi re ratian owa'ana riwra , Tuna , la'pa emkade , de hya ' a ed mak krei piede Musa nhopan pa tala horta yapie'era la hawa patke ' a maka it tahmen doinia la ?
He said to them , Moses , because of the hardness of your hearts , allowed you to divorce your wives , but from the beginning it has not been so . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Musa nhur niohora pa mihmen doinia miy patke'emi yoma miy o'ta tehrami lawan rehia . Mere Uplerlawna ralma-riorni la ' ululu , mak Enakoki-nayapi nohkerna de ematia ' a hade .
I tell you that whoever divorces his wife , except for sexual immorality , and marries another , commits adultery , and he who marries her when she is divorced commits adultery . ||| Mitlin A li'ru ri , muanke ' a ida hawni edonna nalira-naliai , de muanke ' de nakleha tnikilgeni pia nhopliala patke ' de . Mere la'pa patke ' de edon nalira-naliai , noma muanke ' de nhopliala hawni pa nla nora patke ' a id owa'an rmehlima , de emeknekama nalira-naliai lia Uplerlawna yamkekni .
His disciples said to him , If this is the case of the man with his wife , it is not expedient to marry . ||| La ' noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riwra , Matroma la'pa hota emkade , yana tmehlim nek wa .
But he said to them , Not all men can receive this saying , but those to whom it is given . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni re Niwra , Hota riy liawanni nekane edonna rwayow nohora miy wniarormi-wnialaimi de . Eneknek to'ama riy maka Uplerlawna Nal ruri-lai lia de pa yan rmehlima me la'pa edon rmehlima edon ralira-raliai wiali .
For there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother 's womb , and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men , and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven 's sake . He who is able to receive it , let him receive it . ||| Yoma la ' riy doma , de edonna rmehlima , yoma ha niod miemna hade la inni apannu ralamni . La ' dom pal die edonna rmehlima , yoma riy doma to ' a rerieini . Ne dom pal die orgahi rahmena rmehlima , totpena yana nodia yawuhi-yawe'eta la ira kniarni la Uplerlawna mak kodia riy totpena rla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka ir Rayni . Pede riy maka Uplerlawna Nala ruri-lai lia de pa yana rmehlima , ir er maka kreiniana-ka'nana miy wniarormi de .
Then little children were brought to him that he should lay his hands on them and pray , and the disciples rebuked them . ||| Riy rmai die rodia keke'enku ' a la ' Yesus totpena Yesus Nran limni la ir wawannu pa Nwak la Uplerlawna pa na Nhilpai-nmanatga re . Mere maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rawenan la mak kodia upa-a'na re .
But Jesus said , Allow the little children , and do n't forbid them to come to me , for the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to ones like these . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu re Niwra , Miolin doinia keke'enku ' a re pa rmai A ' die . Yana mpiayotlia re , yoma riy mak edon katulu-kapetna inonni mere plet pa rpesiay pia emeknekama keke'enku ' a re er maka Uplerlawna Nwaliria pa rler teman la riy mak kmormior lia E tnioranni-riautnu ralamni .
He laid his hands on them , and departed from there . ||| Noma Yesus Nran limni la keke'enku ' a re o'tani wawannu pa Nhilpai-nmanatga re , nhor nia'nama Nwatitin la gen die .
Behold , one came to him and said , Good teacher , what good thing shall I do , that I may have eternal life ? ||| La ' lera ida ne tuwari ida nmai pia natiana Yesus Niwra , Am tungkurga , ilu-wniehwa samomuou hya ' ed maka hota aghi ' a totpena aliernana mormiori-dardiaria plalahwa pa nodi liarni ?
He said to him , Why do you call me good ? No one is good but one , that is , God . But if you want to enter into life , keep the commandments . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hya ' a nrei piede o ma mutian nohora A ' di la hya ' mak samoga ? Mutlina , mak plollol pa samomuou die enekneka Uplerlawna Nmemeh ' a to ' a . La'pa omuiwra mlier la mormiori plalahwa de mliernohora deulu-tatra maka Uplerlawna ha Nakotkota .
He said to him , Which ones ? Jesus said , ‘ You shall not murder . ' ‘ You shall not commit adultery . ' ‘ You shall not steal . ' ‘ You shall not offer false testimony . ' ||| Noma riy de natiana , Deulu-tatra meni ed maka hota aliernohor reria ? Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Yana mpunu-mpuenna , yana mulira-muliai , yana mkiamnelu-mkiamna ' a , yana muod niana riy mak khala ,
‘ Honor your father and your mother . ' And , ‘ You shall love your neighbor as yourself . ' ||| muatu mu'unni-mumta'ata inmu-ammu , me muatu mtiulla-msiayni mura ' a-mupal walia rimormior wialmu pa emekwalima mumkek rer lia inon wamuehemu .
The young man said to him , All these things I have observed from my youth . What do I still lack ? ||| Noma tuwar die nwalolla Yesus pa niwra , Tuna , maka Mukot taru honona de , a ' g e liernohor momuog oleka re . Ne hya ' owa'ana ed maka a ' g edon ghi ' ma'ta ?
Jesus said to him , If you want to be perfect , go , sell what you have , and give to the poor , and you will have treasure in heaven , and come , follow me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , La'pa omuiwra mlia ' riy plollola-plele'er la Uplerlawna yamkekni , de mlia ' pa mu'ol dioin momuoga re'emu-tniarmu re honona , pa muala welli kupna-kai la ' a riy mak kakleha-kaplara , a'na ri'ini patyatni , ne hota omliernana re ' a-tniaru la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mhi ' hare honona nanpena ma mliernohor reri A ' u .
But when the young man heard this , he went away sad , for he was one who had great possessions . ||| La'pa tuwar die natlin nana lira-tunu re dewade nla'awa de ralamni nmolu-nhelam doin la , yoma re'eni-tniarnu harahu rehia .
Jesus said to his disciples , Most certainly I say to you , a rich man will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven with difficulty . ||| Yesus Nhar lirni la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Mhioratreria , hota riy makre ' a-maktaru riwra rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , de rler la yawuhi-yawe'et lawna .
Again I tell you , it is easier for a camel to go through a needle 's eye than for a rich man to enter into God 's Kingdom . ||| Mitlina , riy maka kre ' a-ktaru mak kiwa rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak Enodi plolli la emeka Ray , de hota emeknekama hayori lawna niwra nlola nhior lawra hu'ulli , mere taken niana .
When the disciples heard it , they were exceedingly astonished , saying , Who then can be saved ? ||| La'pa maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratlin nana Yesus lirni-tunnu re dewade honona rwer rer wiawni . Noma rakot la , La'pa makre ' a-ktaru re ta'en niana rla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu de hota he ' ed maka klernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de ho ' a ?
Looking at them , Jesus said , With men this is impossible , but with God all things are possible . ||| Yesus Namkek la honona na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Ta'en niana rimormiori ramori-ralewna inonni . Mere Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa Namori-nalewna ira , yoma Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni etla pa Nhi ' nana-nyap niana hare honona .
Then Peter answered , Behold , we have left everything and followed you . What then will we have ? ||| Noma Petrus nhar lirni pa nakot la Yesus Niwra , Matroma , a hononam di de ami e mto'or momuou lia haneknek wawannu pa ami e mlernohor O ' a . Ne hota hya ' ed maka amlernana ?
Jesus said to them , Most certainly I tell you that you who have followed me , in the regeneration when the Son of Man will sit on the throne of his glory , you also will sit on twelve thrones , judging the twelve tribes of Israel . ||| Yesus Nwahla lirni re Niwra , Mpiesiaya , hota la ' a noh warwuar die Rimormiori A'nani A ' die hota ed maka kaliwna la mtatangeni mak kamrehi-kamda'ar nohora liplipni-kamka'mani me la ' ler de hota miy maklernohor reri A ' muana mimtatan la ray liwangeni termida wehrani woru re hananni , totpena miodi plolli la Israel luwnu-a'nani termida wehrani woru re .
Everyone who has left houses , or brothers , or sisters , or father , or mother , or wife , or children , or lands , for my name 's sake , will receive one hundred times , and will inherit eternal life . ||| Ne la ' pa he ' ed mak kaltarga romni , nor wutga hawni-a'nani inni-amni inni-narni onde nhyi'ini , yoma la ' A rerie'yu de hota riy de nlernan owa'ana rahu ida tni'illi . Ne hota nlernan walia mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But many will be last who are first , and first who are last . ||| Mere hota riy mutlialawna mak kla ' orkotkota-ornanana onde mak kre ' a-ktaru hota rtawli'iru ne mak kakleh weli onde mak edon kre ' a-ktaru hota rala ' ul tiargho ' a .
For the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who was the master of a household , who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard . ||| Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni la E mutnu-rahanu mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka Ray , de hota emeknekama lira yawalliohor di . De or nhyi ' ida , la'pa yawyawar ma'ta de , la ' pa nla nahaka riy mak kar lia nhyi'ini-tlunanni .
When he had agreed with the laborers for a denarius a day , he sent them into his vineyard . ||| Nla ' pa nlernana riy mak kari , de net mieman la siewni-kaini dinar ida emeka nhi'inde riy rlernana la lera ida , ne rrana kniari la ' ler de memna .
He went out about the third hour , and saw others standing idle in the marketplace . ||| La'pa riy e rtepartarlia kniari la ler panpahna , mere ora nhyi ' a-tlun de nla pa namkek de mak kakleha kniari dom de e rtepartarlia yahe ' i la ya'olgeni .
He said to them , ‘ You also go into the vineyard , and whatever is right I will give you . ' So they went their way . ||| Noma nakot la , Oi , mai pia mlia mkiar lia a nhyi ' a-tlunnu . Pena agala siepmi-kaimi de lol talanni .
Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour , and did likewise . ||| Noma rlernohora pa rla'awa . La'pa lera nwawuau ro'onni jam 12 noma ora nhyi ' de nlergot pa npolg owa'an riy dom pa rma rkar lia nhyi'ini . Ne la'pa lera nhierni jam 3 nhi ' owa'an emkade .
About the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing idle . He said to them , ‘ Why do you stand here all day idle ? ' ||| La'pa la'awa lera nher wiarta jam 5 nhi ' owa'an emkade pa nla namkek de riy doma e rmeh ' a raheiye'eya . Noma natiana re , Oi , hya ' a nrei pia la ' ler lawan di de miy edon mkiari mere mtiutrier niek wa ?
They said to him , ‘ Because no one has hired us . ' He said to them , ‘ You also go into the vineyard , and you will receive whatever is right . ' ||| Noma mak kmeh ' a katuttutrieri re rwalolla riwra , Ami edonna mlernana kniari . Oi ! La'pa emkade , de mai pia mlia mkiar lia a nhyi ' a-tlunnu .
When evening had come , the lord of the vineyard said to his manager , ‘ Call the laborers and pay them their wages , beginning from the last to the first . ' ||| Nla ' pa lera nmella wa jam 6 noma or nhyi ' de nakot la mak kodia mat la kniar die niwra , Muwoka mak kari re pa mpuairia rima-rima siewni-kaini , de mpuau ulia la mak na'nama kar lia lera nhierni de , pa lorlor la mak kar lia yawyawra re honona .
When those who were hired at about the eleventh hour came , they each received a denarius . ||| Noma mak kar lia lera nhierni re rala ' ul pua rma ra'ala dinar ida de kupna-kaini la ' ler id gahani .
When the first came , they supposed that they would receive more , and they likewise each received a denarius . ||| Lala'pa nhorwua noma mak kar lia yawyawra re rmai pia ra ' walia kaini . Irwarora de ir rrana kniari la yawyawar ma'ta pede hota ir siewni-kaini re rarehelia mak na'nama kma kari re . Yah ! Neknanama ha rlernan to ' a kupna emekwali maka na'nama kari re .
When they received it , they murmured against the master of the household , ||| Rla ' pa ra'ala kupna re , de ha raltier yat la ' a ora nhyi'-tlunni de .
saying , ‘ These last have spent one hour , and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat ! ' ||| Mak kar lia yawyawra re riwra , Hya ' a nrei pia mak na'nama kar lia lera nhierni re rkar nian toto ' a lera ho'ke'eni nmeh ' a mere am die amkar lia ler pahna matmiat liawan de , ne a papiair mamni ramneneha ?
But he answered one of them , ‘ Friend , I am doing you no wrong . Did n't you agree with me for a denarius ? ||| Noma ora nhyi ' de nwalolla riy id la ira niwra , Harya , a ' g edonna ghal nohora o ' a . Yoma dodo'ona itwatetar la o kaimu de kupna dinar ida mere o ' edonna mpuayotlia toh !
Take that which is yours , and go your way . It is my desire to give to this last just as much as to you . ||| Mua ' nek la kaimu di pa mlia ' a nek wa . A ralmu naplele'er pa agala mak na'nama kari re kaini , de ror miy ramneneha .
Is n't it lawful for me to do what I want to with what I own ? Or is your eye evil , because I am good ? ' ||| Hya ' ed mak krei pia taken niana age'era-ghakra a re ' u-tniar wamueh ' u ? ! Yanpa la ' o wniarormu de yana aghi ' a ralam kalwied la rira ? !
So the last will be first , and the first last . For many are called , but few are chosen . ||| Yesus Nwat lirni de pa Niwra , Pede miy miak katlin la yawalliohor di mhioratreria ! Emeknekama mak kar lia ' lera nhierni rlernana siewa-kaini ulu , emkade walia riy mak ktawli'iru hota rwal lia ' mak kala ' ulu , me mak kala ' ulu rwal tiargho'ola mak ktawli'iru .
As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem , he took the twelve disciples aside , and on the way he said to them , ||| La ' lera ida pa Yesus Niwa Nla'awa la Yerusalem , noma Nden nek la talan letgar pa Npolg awoka maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy termida wehrani woru pa rmeh ' a la ' gen ida na'nama Nakot la Niwra ,
Behold , we are going up to Jerusalem , and the Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and scribes , and they will condemn him to death , ||| Mitlina ! Dodo'ondi de itsortut niana Yerusalem . Hota la hande de ra'ol Rimormiori A'na A ' die la imam-imam o'tani-matni me la ' walia makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama pa ra'anlira-remunwawa pa hota ha rukum pen A ' u .
and will hand him over to the Gentiles to mock , to scourge , and to crucify , and the third day he will be raised up . ||| Nhor niampena ral A lia riy maka Yahudi atia ' a . Hota rhi ' A lia hamalmialia , me rliwra-rkaklia A ' u na'nama rla rwairi A lia auwlakar hananni pa Alier la matmiati-molmuol die . Mere hota la'pa lera nodia wotellu de hota Uplerlawna Namori-nalewan owa'an A lia matmiati ralamni .
Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons , kneeling and asking a certain thing of him . ||| Nhor nioma Sebedeus patke'eni nor wutga upni-a'nani , Yakowsi nor Yohansi , rmai Yesus de . Noma pat de nler la Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama nwaltior la gaini pa npolu-nwak la .
He said to her , What do you want ? She said to him , Command that these , my two sons , may sit , one on your right hand and one on your left hand , in your Kingdom . ||| Yesus Natiana , Ompuaka hya ' a ine ? Noma pat de nwahla lirni niwra , Amee , awuak de la'pa Omlia ' Ray de a a'nu rora ramtatna pa rhapetre'ru la ' a O liwangenmu de totpa amlernan wali ya'uli-yawedi .
But Jesus answered , You do n't know what you are asking . Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink , and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with ? They said to him , We are able . ||| Yesus Nakot la pat de a'nani rora Niwra , Miy miplin niohora miy wakwakmi de . Hota miy di de mpiaran pia mitahan nana kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a maka Aliernan dena ? Noma rwahla Yesus yatianni de riwra , Hota amtahan nana .
He said to them , You will indeed drink my cup , and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with , but to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give , but it is for whom it has been prepared by my Father . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Plola hota mlier la kropna-krieutu maka Aliernan de mere hota la'pa mak kamtatan la A wa'lu malwiru-malganna pa rhapet reri A ' die , A ' g edonna godi plolli pa wuet la riy meni ed mak kamtatan la gen die . La ' geni-tiena re , de A A'mu nanpena ed mak kodi plolli pa Entutg he ' ed mak kamtatan la . Ne Enwalir nian oleka hare la ' ululu .
When the ten heard it , they were indignant with the two brothers . ||| La'pa riy mak ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re korni riy termida re ratlin Yakowsi nora Yohansi wakwakni de ralamni ramehra la riy maroro ' a mak kwahyali re .
But Jesus summoned them , and said , You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them , and their great ones exercise authority over them . ||| Hade pede Yesus Npolg awoka momuoga honona na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Hyal miy re , miatg oleka de o'ta-mat lalawna me mak klernana gen tiutullu maka kodi plolli la ' luwu-a'na mak raplin niohora Uplerlawna , de rtern apitga limni-rorni .
It shall not be so among you , but whoever desires to become great among you shall be your servant . ||| Yana mhi ' a nhioli-liet mak emkare . Mpialdioinia de , la'pa he ' mak kiwra klernana gen tiutullu , talanni , de nhoi-ntania rimormior wialli pa emeknekama hopopna ida nhoi-ntania matromni .
Whoever desires to be first among you shall be your bondservant , ||| Ne la riy mak kiwra kala ' ul miy , de nwahyar tialan pa makpesiay wialli rlola pa emolmolan nekama ata-wa'ara ida nhi ' a la matromni .
even as the Son of Man came not to be served , but to serve , and to give his life as a ransom for many . ||| Pa emekwalima Rimormiori A'na A ' wuali . Yoma Amuai die , A wniaro'ru de totpa edonna rhoi-rtani A ' u , mere Amuai die ghoi-tiania rimormiori , me gal ino'nu emeka tniuwu-nhiaiya pa A'ulewna rimormiori harahu mak kwatiawua hairi-hairi honona .
As they went out from Jericho , a great multitude followed him . ||| La'pa Yesus Nor maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwatitin la Yeriko de riy harahu rlernohor reria .
Behold , two blind men sitting by the road , when they heard that Jesus was passing by , cried out , Lord , have mercy on us , you son of David ! ||| Mere riy woru mak matni kyata ramtatna la talan lawna aratni . La'pa ratlin nan tutga de Yesus e Nlola hande dewade rrora rhaun pa riwra , Matrome , Ray Daud upni-a'nani ne ! Mtiulla-msiayn nan mai ami ee !
The multitude rebuked them , telling them that they should be quiet , but they cried out even more , Lord , have mercy on us , you son of David ! ||| Riy mutlialawan makden la hande rawenan la riy maroro ' a re riwra , Hoi ! Mmiolmiolmi ! Mere riy mat yata rora yeher to'ama rarur lia nhiaunu pa riwra , Matroma , Ray Daud upni-a'nani ne ! Mtiulan-msiayn nan mai ami ee !
Jesus stood still and called them , and asked , What do you want me to do for you ? ||| Noma Yesus Ntut tiaru na'nama Npol lia mak matni kyata re pa Natiana re Niwra , Hya ' ed maka mpiaka mai A ' u ?
They told him , Lord , that our eyes may be opened . ||| Noma rrora rwahla Yesus lirni riwra , Matrome , amiwra mamkek owa'ana !
Jesus , being moved with compassion , touched their eyes , and immediately their eyes received their sight , and they followed him . ||| Yesus ralamni ntuin doin la ' irrora yamkekni dewade Nteman la rrora matni pa mtatan de nekpa matni re raphyar wia . Noma rlernohor Yesus pa rla'awa .
When they came near to Jerusalem and came to Bethsphage , to the Mount of Olives , then Jesus sent two disciples , ||| La'pa Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhi ' pa rwakriania Yerusalem noma rlola Betfagi la ' a wo'ora Saitun hananni . Noma Yesus Nhopan pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy woru rala ' ulu
saying to them , Go into the village that is opposite you , and immediately you will find a donkey tied , and a colt with her . Untie them and bring them to me . ||| pua rla ' a let maka ir rwakrian olek de . Yesus Nano ' a re Niwra , Hota la ' de mimkek nan memna keledai ida e naknioh wut lia a'nani . Mlia ' pa mlieretniekla miewar doinia pa miodi mmiai .
If anyone says anything to you , you shall say , ‘ The Lord needs them , ' and immediately he will send them . ||| La'pa riy ida npolliohor miy , de mikot la miwra , Itmatromlawanni e Nwaka perlu . Ne hota riy de edonna nakotkot hadom la ' a keledai re wawannu mere plet pa nollia pa miodi mmiai .
All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet , saying , ||| La hade de hota ntuin tar lia makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni niwra ,
Tell the daughter of Zion , behold , your King comes to you , humble , and riding on a donkey , on a colt , the foal of a donkey . ||| Mikot nohora harella Sion mniotni miwra , Mimkek ee ! Hota Raymi e Nmai die , Entutga yehwa mnapnapla me nhiu'ru-nhielma pa Nha ' nan to ' a keledai a'na ida .
The disciples went and did just as Jesus commanded them , ||| Nhor nioma talanwalli rora re rla'awa pa rhi ' a hya ' ed maka Yesus Nakota re .
and brought the donkey and the colt and laid their clothes on them , and he sat on them . ||| La'pa rmai die rodia keledai de nor wutga a'nani de rewre'wa . Noma irrora ral walia rain plalahwani re ra rwowa keledai a'na to'orni totpena Yesus Nha ' a nana .
A very great multitude spread their clothes on the road . Others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road . ||| Riy harahu la mutlialawna re rtutga nhiu'ru-nhielma la ' a rala naniair plalahwa ra rwowa la ' talla , me korni rtuhia ora tawi-au tiawi motmota pa ra re'era la talla , totpena keledai re rlola wawannu .
The multitudes who went in front of him , and those who followed , kept shouting , Hosanna to the son of David ! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord ! Hosanna in the highest ! ||| Riy rahu re la'pa rlol gaini me mak ktawli'iru pa rletgar nana Yesus . Ne rhaunu-rhaun pa riwra , Ya'uli-yawedi nden rer tiy O ' ee ! Ray Daud upni-a'nani maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru die ! Ta'uli-tawedia tsu'ru-tselma O mak kmai pia kodia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni . Ta'uli-tawedi , tlilili-tmamuau Uplerlawna la tutullu-lolo'oni !
When he had come into Jerusalem , all the city was stirred up , saying , Who is this ? ||| La'pa Yesus Nler la leta Yerusalem ralamni dewade let de nler la kokokna-rariarin lawna . Leta Yerusalem mniotni riwra , He ' a di ?
The multitudes said , This is the prophet , Jesus , from Nazareth of Galilee . ||| Riy rahu mak kor Yesus talan pa rmai re rwalolla riwra , Yesus makwohorulu-ktatrulu inhatta , Nwatiawua leta Nasaret la ' Galilea yapatni oo !
Jesus entered into the temple of God and drove out all of those who sold and bought in the temple , and overthrew the money changers ' tables and the seats of those who sold the doves . ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nla'awa Uplerlawna roma kreini herni-gaini pa Nhokra-nlaiya mak ka'olu-kala ' a kaweli-kaphar la hande . Nte'la la mei-kader maka ha rwahernia kupna me mak ha ra'olu-rala ' a ma'nu loktieru , pa Nkowa-nwalia .
He said to them , It is written , ‘ My house shall be called a house of prayer , ' but you have made it a den of robbers ! ||| Na'nama Nakot la mak ka'olu-kala ' a kaweli-kaphara re Niwra , E rhorat targ olek la Puka ralamni Uplerlawna lirni de Niwra , Hota rweta A ro'mu de roma sniumbain geni de , mere miy mhi ' a la roma kamnelu-kamna ' geni !
The lame and the blind came to him in the temple , and he healed them . ||| Dewade riy maka matni kyata ror wutga maka lakni ktu ' u-kwaini , rma rahaka Yesus la ' a roma-krei . Ne Yesus Nhi ' honona rpa rler la kalwiedni .
But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did , and the children who were crying in the temple and saying , Hosanna to the son of David ! they were indignant , ||| Mere imam re o'tani-matni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama deullu-tatarni re ralamni ramehra la Yesus hi'ini-yapyapni mak kamehi-kayona maka khi ' kalwieda mak kamehra re . Ne rahankeran wal lia keke'enku ' a re riarni-riarin la ' a krei herni-gaini pa riwra , Mmuori-mdiari ray Daud duratni nee !
and said to him , Do you hear what these are saying ? Jesus said to them , Yes . Did you never read , ‘ Out of the mouth of children and nursing babies , you have perfected praise ' ? ||| Noma ratiana Yesus riwra , Omutlin oleka lir maka ha rakota rena ? Yesus Nakot la re , Yowa , A ' g e utlin wal lia . Oi , miy edonna mpiaik nan ma'ta harella ' Puka ralamni ? ! De e rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni mak Eniwra , Enwatutg oleka upa-a'na lokmera-papay re pa rat niohora ra'uli-rawedi E ' a .
He left them and went out of the city to Bethany , and camped there . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhoitio'or la hare pa Nlergot la letlawna Yerusalem pa Nokria leta Betania me Nanin tar lia hande .
Now in the morning , as he returned to the city , he was hungry . ||| La'pa repar yawyawar noma Yesus Nor mutwualli re rawal lia letlawna Yerusalem , ne Yesus Naplar oleka wa .
Seeing a fig tree by the road , he came to it and found nothing on it but leaves . He said to it , Let there be no fruit from you forever ! Immediately the fig tree withered away . ||| Noma Namkek nana kar ona id la ' talla aratni , noma Nla Nwahak wo'oni pa Na'ana , mere kar on de nakleh wo ' a . Mere tawni mamaini . Noma Yesus Nhar lirni la kar on de Niwra , Dodo'ondi mkieran wa pa hota omukleh wo ' owa'an wa ! Noma kar on de nleretniekla napliau lia genni .
When the disciples saw it , they marveled , saying , How did the fig tree immediately wither away ? ||| La'pa mak Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramkek hade noma honona re rwer rer wiawni . Noma ratiana , Hya ' a nrei pia kar on de nleretniekla nmat wia ?
Jesus answered them , Most certainly I tell you , if you have faith and do n't doubt , you will not only do what was done to the fig tree , but even if you told this mountain , ‘ Be taken up and cast into the sea , ' it would be done . ||| Yesus Niwra , Mhioratreria , la'pa miy pesiaymi edonna nwalera de hota miy niek de mhi ' walia hya ' maka Aghi ' oleka la ' a kar on de . Ne hota hade edonna nmeh ' a mere la'pa mikot to'ola wo'or di pa nwarei lia tah ' i lawna hota narinni la ' tah ' i lawna ralamni .
All things , whatever you ask in prayer , believing , you will receive . ||| Hya ' to ' pa mimpiaka la ' a miy sniumbainmi de hota mimliernana , hornama pesiaymi yana nwalera .
When he had come into the temple , the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching , and said , By what authority do you do these things ? Who gave you this authority ? ||| La ' noma Yesus Nawali owa'an la Uplerlawna roma kreini pa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a . La'pa Ntepartarlia wniatutu-wniaye ' a , dewade imam-imam o'tani-matni re ror wutga Yahudi in letni-am letni rmai pia ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , he ' ed mak ktemna plola-mneh della O limmu ralamni pede Omhi ' nan hihi'imu-yapyapmu rena ?
Jesus answered them , I also will ask you one question , which if you tell me , I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these things . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni re Niwra , A ' g e giwra utian tek wali miy , la'pa mimpiet nana , de hota Awuahla miy la ' a he ' a plolli pede Aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi re .
The baptism of John , where was it from ? From heaven or from men ? They reasoned with themselves , saying , If we say , ‘ From heaven , ' he will ask us , ‘ Why then did you not believe him ? ' ||| Pede A'utian tek miy , de hota Yohansi makharani de ha nlernana plol della he ' a ? Uplerlawna onde rimormiori ? Dewade honona re rwahu'ru ralma-riora wamueh ' a pa riwra , La'pa itwet la Uplerlawna ed mak kala plolli la Yohansi de hota Eniwra , Ne hya ' a nrei pia miy edonna mpiesiay e ' a ?
But if we say , ‘ From men , ' we fear the multitude , for all hold John as a prophet . ||| Mere la'pa it twet la tiwra , Rimormiori plolli-mneheni hade , de hota itamta'at rer lia rirahu yoma honona rpesiaya de Yohansi de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id hade .
They answered Jesus , and said , We do n't know . He also said to them , Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things . ||| Pede honona rla ' lir id pa rwahla Yesus riwra , Ami e maplinga . Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hade emkade de hota A ' muana , edonna ukot wahyaria tiy miy la ' a he ' a mak kala plolli mai A ' pua Aghi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi re .
But what do you think ? A man had two sons , and he came to the first , and said , ‘ Son , go work today in my vineyard . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'an la o'ta-mata re Niwra , Dodo'ondi de A'utian teka miy ralma-riormi la lira yawalliohor mak A'ukot di . De la ' lera id pa muanke ' a ida a'nani muanke ' a riy woru . Noma muanke ' de nla nakot la a'nani yanulu niwra , Ama , mlia mkiar lia nhyi ' a-tlunni ralamni la ler di .
He answered , ‘ I will not , ' but afterward he changed his mind , and went . ||| Noma a'nani yanul die nahmena mere nwaror owa'ana , noma nla ' a nhyi'-tlunni de ralamni .
He came to the second , and said the same thing . He answered , ‘ I 'm going , sir , ' but he did n't go . ||| Nhor nioma muanke ' de nla nakot wal lia a'nani gari de emkade wali . Noma a'nani gar die nwayowa mere hota edonna nla ' a .
Which of the two did the will of his father ? They said to him , The first . Jesus said to them , Most certainly I tell you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering into God 's Kingdom before you . ||| Noma la ' a keke'enku ' a rora de he ' ed maka klernohora amni nhiopanni ? Noma rwet la riwra , A'na yanulu . Dewade Yesus Nakot la ir honona Niwra , Mpiesiaya , hota riy mak kawoka blastena , ror patke ' yatyata , rala ' ul miy pia rler wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka Ray .
For John came to you in the way of righteousness , and you did n't believe him , but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him . When you saw it , you did n't even repent afterward , that you might believe him . ||| Yoma Yohansi makharan die nmai pia nwatutu-nwaye ' miy lia hya ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni mere miy emolmolan nekama a'na gari la ' a yawalliohor de pa edonna mliernohora Yohansi wniatutnu-wniaye'eni . Mere mak kawok blastena rora patke ' yatyata rpesiaya me rlernohora Yohansi wniatutnu-wniaye'eni . Ne mimkek walia hare rhern oleka nhiolli mere miy ralammi edon nakwali et pia mliernohora Yohansi lirni de .
Hear another parable . There was a man who was a master of a household who planted a vineyard , set a hedge about it , dug a wine press in it , built a tower , leased it out to farmers , and went into another country . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'an la ira , Mitlina yawalliohora id owa'an hadi . Ornoha ida nawuli-natniamin anggur wo ' a la nhyi'ini-tlunanni ralamni . Nteman riwta la nhyi ' de walli-walli . Ne nahia hu'ula maka rahmi anggur turnu la ralamni . Nhor nia'nama nariria yatiak geni . Nwahi ' a pa nhorwua noma nala nhyi'-tlunni anggur della riy rtimnia . Ne nla nalaun la riy ornoha .
When the season for the fruit came near , he sent his servants to the farmers to receive his fruit . ||| La'pa lerni nwakrian wia pa riwra rreiki-rwo'or wa , dewade ora nhyi ' de nhopna hopopanni-lili'irnu re pa rmai pia ra'ala e nhiakarni la timanni-daharni .
The farmers took his servants , beat one , killed another , and stoned another . ||| Mere maktimni-kdahara re rwaldioin targho ' pa rtorna ora nhyi ' a hopopanni-lili'irnu re . Rwanalga riy ida , me rwenan nan ida . Ne rala watu ra rwatliewur wen id wali .
Again , he sent other servants more than the first , and they treated them the same way . ||| Noma ora nhyi ' de nhopn owa'ana hopopanni-lili'irnu dom owa'ana , de narehia mak kala ' ulu re . Mere mak ktimni-kdahara re rhokra-rlai rwunu-rwen owa'ana .
But afterward he sent to them his son , saying , ‘ They will respect my son . ' ||| Hohoni dewade ora nhyi'-tlun de nhopna e a'nani yoma la ' a wniarorni de , Matialo'onamde ha rhu'ru-rhelma a a'nu .
But the farmers , when they saw the son , said among themselves , ‘ This is the heir . Come , let 's kill him and seize his inheritance . ' ||| Mere la'pa ramkek tut niana ora nhyi'-tlunni a'nani dewade idma nakot la ida riwra , Maka hota kodi plolli la ononni e inhatti ! Mai pia itatuinia aranni totpena itlernana nhyi ' a-tlunan di !
So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard , then killed him . ||| Dewade rtorna riy de pa rnaklia la nhyi ' de to'orni na'nama rwenna .
When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes , what will he do to those farmers ? ||| Noma Yesus Natiana o'ta-mata re Niwra , La'pa hota ora nhyi ' de nawal lia hande de hota nhi ' a hya ' a la maktimni-makdahara reno ?
They told him , He will miserably destroy those miserable men , and will lease out the vineyard to other farmers who will give him the fruit in its season . ||| Noma rwah ' a lirni riwra , Tuna , hota ora nhyi ' de nwunu-nwenna riy yatyata-halala re pa ir matmiatni nhi ' it pa tamta'ata , ne nla nal targho ' a nhyi'ini-tlunanni della riy dom to ' pa rtimni-rdahar samomuoga pa rala ora nhyi ' de nhiakarni la timanni-daharni .
Jesus said to them , Did you never read in the Scriptures , ‘ The stone which the builders rejected was made the head of the corner . This was from the Lord . It is marvelous in our eyes ' ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Miy edonna mpiaik ma'ta la maka rhorat targa la Puka ralamni la ' a wat muaka ha rtot nohora la Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar dena ? De niwra , Wat muaka tukna edonna rnair nana pa rhi ' a roma-lewu , mere rhopliala , de Uplerlawna Nnairi oleka pa Nhi ' a la watu liar pianulu . Hadi ed mak Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhi ' a . Adoh ha samounu nee !
Therefore I tell you , God 's Kingdom will be taken away from you and will be given to a nation producing its fruit . ||| Yahudi o'tani-matni miy , miy er mak edon mrieinian Ray Makamori-Kalewna . Hade pede mhioratreria ! Hota miy edon mior wutga Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka Ray . Mere hota Agala hairi dom pa rre'ela Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu . Ir er mak klernohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces , but on whomever it will fall , it will scatter him as dust . ||| Mere riy maka kahmena kreinian A ' u de hota rler la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani pa emolmolan nekama riy mak ktuin pa ktaiya watu onde riy mak watu nwaklol niana , de hota ramkoha-ramnana pa rwal lia en liu'wu-tan miakmu .
When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables , they perceived that he spoke about them . ||| La'pa imam re o'tani-matni ror wutga riy Parisi re ratlin tutga yawalliohora maka Yesus Nakota re , de irat muemna Yesus lirni de e ntai ira .
When they sought to seize him , they feared the multitudes , because they considered him to be a prophet . ||| Hade pede rwahak talan pa rtorna Yesus . Mere ramta'at rer lia ' rirahu yoma rira liawanni rpolga Yesus la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu id hade .
Jesus answered and spoke to them again in parables , saying , ||| Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora id owa'an pa na Nwahaur la o'ta-mata re , Niwra ,
The Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king , who made a wedding feast for his son , ||| La ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka Ray , de Uplerlawna hihi'ini yala'ani emeknekama yawalliohor di . De Uplerlawna emolmolan nekama ray id mak kiwra khi ' a he ' i-hepur nohora a'nani muanke ' a mehlimni-marya'ani .
and sent out his servants to call those who were invited to the wedding feast , but they would not come . ||| De ray die nhopan pa mak ktulla-kar lia e ' a rla pa rpolga riy maka ray die ha npol niana-nwak nana oleka pa rma ramtatna . Mere maka rpol niana-rwak nana re rahmena rmai .
Again he sent out other servants , saying , ‘ Tell those who are invited , Behold , I have prepared my dinner . My cattle and my fatlings are killed , and all things are ready . Come to the wedding feast ! ' ||| Noma ray die nhopan pa mak ktulla-kar lia E ' a re dom to ' a rla rhu'ru-rhelam la mak ha rpol niana-rwak nana re riwra , Mia mimtatanmi yoma nhioi-tniani la ' mei wawannu namtemtemn olekwa . A pipi-du'mu mak kden la lowna-krahanu raknioki-ratnia'awa momuog olekwa me er olek la mei wawannu . Mai pia tamkek la it gaini .
But they made light of it , and went their ways , one to his own farm , another to his merchandise , ||| Mere mak ha rpol niana re edonna rga ' niohor polpuolu-wakwak de pede rla'awa la ' a kniar genni me dom de rla'awa nhyi ' ralma .
and the rest grabbed his servants , treated them shamefully , and killed them . ||| Ne korni de rtoran targho ' a ray die hopopanni-lili'irnu pa ralla yetni warna na'nama rliwar wenwenna re .
When the king heard that , he was angry , and sent his armies , destroyed those murderers , and burned their city . ||| La'pa ray die natlin nan hare de nawenan doin la . Pa nreiniande nhopan pa ralgota limni-rorni mak ka'ara pa rwunu-rwenna riy yatyat mak kwunu-kwenna ray hopopanni re , na'nama rhoklai la ir letni .
Then he said to his servants , ‘ The wedding is ready , but those who were invited were n't worthy . ||| Nhor nia'nama ray die npolga mak ktulla-kar lia e ' a re pa niwra , Itwahi ' oleka he ' i-hepru la ' a mehlima-marya ' di mere maka apuolu-wuak ulu re ta'en niana ra'an wut mai a ' u la mehlima-marya ' di .
Go therefore to the intersections of the highways , and as many as you may find , invite to the wedding feast . ' ||| Pede mliergot pa mpiolu-mpiak he ' to ' a mak kden la loi liawna-talan lawna pa rma rahepur pa ra'ana-remun la handi .
Those servants went out into the highways and gathered together as many as they found , both bad and good . The wedding was filled with guests . ||| Dewade mak ktulla-kari re rla'awa pa rla rawoka-rale'ga riy mak kden la loi liawna-talan lawna re pa rriw niana momuoga pa rma rapenga geni-tiena maka ha rhi ' targ oleka re . Riy kalwieda nor wutga riy yatyata er momuou lia hande .
But when the king came in to see the guests , he saw there a man who did n't have on wedding clothing , ||| Nhor nia'nama ray die nmai pia nlina-nmata mak kmai re honona la hande . La hande de ray namkek nana riy ida edonna nnairi naniair maka riy rnairia pa rahe ' i-rahepur la mehlima-marya ' a .
and he said to him , ‘ Friend , how did you come in here not wearing wedding clothing ? ' He was speechless . ||| Noma ray nakot la riy de niwra , Hyalia , nihya'pa Ommuai handi de o ' edonna mniairia naniairia muki-hepru la ' a mehlima-marya ' dina ? Mere riy de edonna nwalol hadoma .
Then the king said to the servants , ‘ Bind him hand and foot , take him away , and throw him into the outer darkness . That is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be . ' ||| Noma ray nakot la maktulla-makar lia hande niwra , Mpiutu-mkiohoga ha limni-lakni ne mrinnia la melmelli-kalkalamni la ' lutur lawna to'orni . Hota la ' hande de riy e rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni .
For many are called , but few chosen . ||| Noma Yesus Nwatia lirni la ' a yawalliohor de pa Niwra , La ' a emkade wal pia polpuolu la ' riy harahu pa rler teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , mere mak ha rwaliri , de riy doma rmeh ' a .
Then the Pharisees went and took counsel how they might entrap him in his talk . ||| Nhorwua noma riy Parisi rla ' pa rawok pa rwahu'ria ralma-riora , totpena rna'aili Yesus .
They sent their disciples to him , along with the Herodians , saying , Teacher , we know that you are honest , and teach the way of God in truth , no matter whom you teach , for you are n't partial to anyone . ||| Noma rhopan doinia ir mutwualli doma ror wut wualia riy mak kher lia Herodes totpa rla ' a Yesus de pa ratiana riwra , Tungkurga , amatga de riy plele'er id O ' a . O ' e Mpuatut die , Mukot nohor plollolli la Uplerlawna ralma-rior kalwiedwedni la ' a rimormiori . O ' edonna Mhue'du nan etia riy ralma-riorni , yoma riy lalawna onde riy kuku'uni ho'mana O ' edon Mpuadan nohora .
Tell us therefore , what do you think ? Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar , or not ? ||| La ' hade pede Mukot teka la mai ami , de la ' O wniarormu de , la ' it agamni deullu-tatarni de nakot am pia ampairia blastena la ' a mak ktorna horta-hairi Kaisar onde yana ?
But Jesus perceived their wickedness , and said , Why do you test me , you hypocrites ? ||| Mere yatianni re de Yesus Nat niohora ira nnia'ohma yatyatni honona . Pede Yesus Nwahla re , Oi riy kdior miera miy ! Mtiut inonmi emeka riy mak samomuou mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Hya ' a nrei pia miwra mtiot A ' u ? !
Show me the tax money . They brought to him a denarius . ||| Mi'al tek la kupan maka ma mpiairia blasten la pa mtiut tieka la mai A ' u . Dewade rala kupan dinar id pa rtutga la Yesus .
He asked them , Whose is this image and inscription ? ||| Noma Yesus Natiana re , La kupan de he ' a herni-gaini me he ' nanni mak kden la kupan dena ?
They said to him , Caesar 's . Then he said to them , Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar 's , and to God the things that are God 's . ||| Noma rwet la riwra , Ray mak ktorna horta-hairi Romawi Kaisar o'tani inhat ee ! Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Hade emkade , miala kupan maka ray herni-gaini etla de la ' a ray , yoma hanni hade . Ne miala la Uplerlawna hya ' maka Uplerlawna gahani wali .
When they heard it , they marveled , and left him and went away . ||| La'pa ratlin nana lira wniahla re honona , de honona rwer rer wiawni . Noma honona rwatitin la gen diewa pa rto'or la Yesus .
On that day Sadducees those who say that there is no resurrection came to him . They asked him , ||| La ' ler de nekpa riy Saduki doma rmai pia ratian nohora Yesus la ' a emkameni riy mak kmati hota rmori owa'ana , yoma Saduki re er mak edonna kpesiay riy mak kmati hota rmori owa'ana .
saying , Teacher , Moses said , ‘ If a man dies , having no children , his brother shall marry his wife and raise up offspring for his brother . ' ||| Riwra , Tungkurga , Musa wniatutnu-wniaye'eni la ita de emkadi , de la'pa muanke ' a ida nmati me nakleh ma'ta a'na , de muanke ' a mak mat die hyalli nor owa'ana yerni patyat de rmehlima , totpena rlernana hyalli mak kmati olek de duratni-waitni .
Now there were with us seven brothers . The first married and died , and having no offspring left his wife to his brother . ||| La ' lera ida de muanke ' a riy wo'itu rwahyal riaralma mak kdella it nohoni . Noma yanulu nmehlima mere nakleh ma't a'na dewade nmat wia . Pede hawni patke ' maka ha nto'or nan de nora yerni muanke ' a ida rmehlima .
In the same way , the second also , and the third , to the seventh . ||| La'pa edonna rlernan ma'ta a'na , de muanke ' de nmat wia . Noma patke ' de nor yerni id owa'ana . Mere emkade to ' pa nodi liarni pa la ntut mueman la gari hoho ' a .
After them all , the woman died . ||| La'awa hohoni noma pat de nmat wia mere nakleh etia a'na ida .
In the resurrection therefore , whose wife will she be of the seven ? For they all had her . ||| Pede la'pa la'awa lerni pa mak mati honona rmori owa'ana , de hota he ' hawni patke ' a dena ? Yoma mak kwahyali re wo'itu meman pa rora pat de rmehlima .
But Jesus answered them , You are mistaken , not knowing the Scriptures , nor the power of God . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla yatianni re Niwra , Oi , miy wniarormi nhala , yoma miplin niohora Puka lirni , me miplin wualia Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni .
For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage , but are like God 's angels in heaven . ||| Yoma riy mak kmati re hota rmori owa'ana , de hota edonna rmehlima , mere hota rmori-rdar lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha , emolmolan nekama Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikat la ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha mak edon rmehlima .
But concerning the resurrection of the dead , have n't you read that which was spoken to you by God , saying , ||| Nah , la ' a miy wniarormi de mak miwra riy hota edon rmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni , de emeknekama miy edonna mpiaik nan ma'ta hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nakot nohora la ' a mak hota kmori owa'an la matmiati ralamni .
‘ I am the God of Abraham , and the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob ' ? God is not the God of the dead , but of the living . ||| Yoma la ' ler maka Abrahama , Isaka , me Yakopa rmati olek de Uplerlawna Niwra , A ' di , de Abraham , Isak , me Yakop Uplerlawanni ma'ta A ' u . Ha nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak kmati rmori owa'ana me Uplerlawna de ir Uplerlawanni . Uplerlawan de , riy mak kmati Uplerlawanni atia ' a hade . E ' de de , mak kmormiori Uplerlawanni E ' a .
When the multitudes heard it , they were astonished at his teaching . ||| La'pa riy mutlialawna re ratlin nana Yesus lirni-tunnu re , de honona re rwer rer wiawni .
But the Pharisees , when they heard that he had silenced the Sadducees , gathered themselves together . ||| La'pa riy Parisi ratlin tutga Yesus Nhi ' nana riy Saduki re de rakleha lira waw la temni , dewade Parisi re rawok owa'an pa rna'ohma .
One of them , a lawyer , asked him a question , testing him . ||| Noma tungkurga agama deullu-tatarni id la ira la nala yatiana id pa na nta'aga Yesus .
Teacher , which is the greatest commandment in the law ? ||| Niwra , Tungkurga , lira nhiopan meni ed maka khi ' ononni la ' a agama deullu-tatarni ?
Jesus said to him , ‘ You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart , with all your soul , and with all your mind . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni Niwra , Miala miy rurmi-laimi , ralma-riormi , ihrami-ralammi tetema pa mhima-mrie ' a Uplerlawna Matromlawanmi de .
This is the first and great commandment . ||| Lira nhiopna , nhiedu tniehra ononni inhatta hade .
A second likewise is this , ‘ You shall love your neighbor as yourself . ' ||| La ' wornu mana emekwalima idni de . De niwra , Miatu mtiulla-msiaynia , mira ' a-mipal wualia rimormiori wialmi pa emekwalima mimkek rer lia inon wamuehemi .
The whole law and the prophets depend on these two commandments . ||| Deulu-tatra agama maka Musa nor wutga makwohorulu-ktatrulu rwatutu re , on petanni-ga'ar lawanni ononni nwatiawua lira nhiopna ri .
Now while the Pharisees were gathered together , Jesus asked them a question , ||| La'pa riy Parisi rden ma'ta la hande noma Yesus Natiana re ,
saying , What do you think of the Christ ? Whose son is he ? They said to him , Of David . ||| A'utian tek miy . La ' a miy wniarormi de Ray maka kamori-kalewan mak Uplerlawna Nano'tar die , de he ' duratni-waitni hadena ? Noma riwra , Ray Daud duratni hade .
He said to them , How then does David in the Spirit call him Lord , saying , ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Hade emkade , de hya ' ed mak krei piede Uplerlawna Nhiwni Narialmua Daud pa nwet la Ray miaka kamori-kalewna de e Matromlawanni ? Yoma Daud niwra ,
‘ The Lord said to my Lord , sit on my right hand , until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet ' ? ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot la a Matromlawnu Yesus Niwra , Muliwnu Mumtatnu la ' A wa'lu malganna , la'pa A'utowra arwalmu pa ratniowar la O nayanmu .
If then David calls him Lord , how is he his son ? ||| La'pa ray Daud nwet la Ray Makamori-Kalewna , niwra e Matromlawanni , nihya'pa mikota ray Daud duratni E ' a ?
No one was able to answer him a word , neither did any man dare ask him any more questions from that day forward . ||| Dewade Yesus Nwatia lirni mere riy id mana edonna naltieri eti la Yesus gaini ralamni . Ne la ' ler de pa nodi liarni de riy id mana edonna nparan pia nhar lirni pa natiana Yesus .
Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ror wutga riy rahu re Niwra ,
saying , The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses ' seat . ||| Makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama me riy Parisi rodi plolli pa ra rwatutga Musa deullu-tatarni re .
All things therefore whatever they tell you to observe , observe and do , but do n't do their works , for they say , and do n't do . ||| La ' hade pede miy e mliernohora hya ' ed maka ha rwatutu-rwaye ' a la ' a Musa deullu-tatarni honona re . Mere yan memmemna mtiolliohora hya ' maka ha rhi ' a re . Yoma irmeh ' a nek de edonna rlernohor hya ' maka ha rwatutu-rwaye ' a re .
For they bind heavy burdens that are grievous to be borne , and lay them on men 's shoulders , but they themselves will not lift a finger to help them . ||| Hare wniatutnu-wniaye'eni re emolmolan nekama rkeni kwar werwerta la riy wawannu , mere edon rtulan nan etia riy totpena rlernohora wniatutnu-wniaye'eni re .
But they do all their works to be seen by men . They make their phylacteries broad and enlarge the fringes of their garments , ||| Hya ' maka ha rhi ' a re de totpena riy ramkek ira . Ralma-riorni de totpa riy ramkek ir de emeka riy mak kape'el la agama . La ' hade pede rhorta Itmatromlawanni lirni na'nama rkenia la geni sapona-sapona dewade rtapla la limni me reranni , ne rnairia rain plalahwa nor tawnu plalahwani .
and love the place of honor at feasts , the best seats in the synagogues , ||| La'pa ramtatna la ' yawoka-yale ' u he ' i-hepru la ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna de rwahak genia samomuou totpa riy ra'uli ira , me rla ' a Yahudi kreini-iskolli de rwahak geni mak kden la gaini .
the salutations in the marketplaces , and to be called ‘ Rabbi , Rabbi ' by men . ||| Ir rahepru yoma mak kden la ya'olgeni rhi ' ir la rekna-waiti me rhoi ir la Tungkuru .
But you are not to be called ‘ Rabbi ' , for one is your teacher , the Christ , and all of you are brothers . ||| Mere miy die yan memmemna mtiolliohor ira yoma mtiot pa riy ra'uli-rawedi miy pa rhoi miy lia Tungkuru . Yoma miy Tungkurmi inhatta id to ' a , ne miy hononmi de mpia'ina-mpianara .
Call no man on the earth your father , for one is your Father , he who is in heaven . ||| Ne yan memmemna mi'uli-miwedia riy mak kden la nohkeran di pa mhioiya la Am plollola , yoma miy Amlawanmi mak kaplollola de ida nmemeh ' a to ' a , mak etla Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Neither be called masters , for one is your master , the Christ . ||| Me yan memmemna mpiayow nohor pa ra'uli-rawedi miy pia rhoiya miy lia Matroma la ' a noha wawannu , yoma Matroma eneknek to'ama riy ida , de A ' g e inhatti maka ha rweta la Ray mormiori-lewlewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru .
But he who is greatest among you will be your servant . ||| Riy maka inponni karehi la ' a wokmi-le'emi , de riy mak katu khoi-ktani la rimormior wialli .
Whoever exalts himself will be humbled , and whoever humbles himself will be exalted . ||| Riy maka katulu-kapetna inonni la heyanan de hota Uplerlawna Nalernia , ne riy maka klol yawa de hota Uplerlawna Nrana la heyanna .
Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! For you devour widows ' houses , and as a pretense you make long prayers . Therefore you will receive greater condemnation . ||| Tungkuru-tungkurga agama miora riy Parisi miy , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Miy mtiutga inonmi emeknekama riy samomuou , mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy munafik . Miy e mtierteri-mtiatawa riy mak kiwra kler la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu . Mere miy mieh ' a nekane mihmena mlier la Uplerlawna mutnu mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka ir Rayni . Ne riy mak kiwa kler la Uplerlawna mutnu demade mtieri-mtiawa .
But woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! Because you shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men , for you do n't enter in yourselves , neither do you allow those who are entering in to enter . ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru agama miora riy Parisi miy , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Mtiutga inonmi de emeka riy kalwiedweda mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy munafik . Miy e miohpa-milahara a'na riy patyata me mrieyahru romni-lewnu . Ne msiumbain de plo ' a-plahwa la riy rahu gaini ralamni totpa ma mtiutwua miy do'omi-halmi . Mere hade mak kariei pia mliernana niukum mak hota kwerwerta nareh dioinia mak riy dom to ' a rlernana .
Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! For you travel around by sea and land to make one proselyte , and when he becomes one , you make him twice as much a son of Gehenna as yourselves . ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru agama me riy Parisi miy , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . La'pa mimihak riy id to ' pa nlernohora miy agammi deullu-tatarni de ho'mana miy e mlieretia hletna-yoiri me miy mhia'ata wo'ora-kawru . Mtiutga inonmi emeka riy kalwiedwed miy . Mere hota miy mrieiniande riy de do'oni-halli nareh dioin miy do'omi-halmi la re'eni woru totpena hota nler meman la ai mormiori ralamni .
Woe to you , you blind guides , who say , ‘ Whoever swears by the temple , it is nothing , but whoever swears by the gold of the temple , he is obligated . ' ||| O'ta-mata miy , de miy emolmolan nekama riy mak mat yata mak ktutga talla la riy dom to ' a . Adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Miy mpiatutga riy miwra la'pa rwet la Uplerlawna roma kreini pa rlokra de edonna nawniatiehra . Mere la'pa rwet la maha no ' krei ralamni pa rlokra de ha nawniatiehra nohora liokarni .
You blind fools ! For which is greater , the gold or the temple that sanctifies the gold ? ||| Miy die mpiodku me matmi yata . Hota ha meni ed mak karehi ? Maha no ' krei ralamni onde krei die mak khi ' pa maha de , Uplerlawna gahani ? !
And , ‘ Whoever swears by the altar , it is nothing , but whoever swears by the gift that is on it , he is obligated . ' ||| Mimpiatut walia hadilla rira . De la'pa rwet la katri'ana pa rlokra de edon nawniatiehra la liokar de . Mere la'pa rwet la prehena-mau maka rkenia la katri'ana wawannu pa rlokra de ha nawniatiehra nohora liokarni .
You blind fools ! For which is greater , the gift , or the altar that sanctifies the gift ? ||| Adoh matmi re yatni ne ee ! Hameni ed maka karehi , prehena-mau , onde katri'ana mak khi ' a prehena-mau pa nwal lia Uplerlawna gahani ? !
He therefore who swears by the altar , swears by it and by everything on it . ||| La ' hade pede la ' pa riy ida nlokar pa nano'taru hadom la katri'ana , nnia'eratni de e nano'targa hadella katri'ana nor wutga hya ' mak kden la katri'ana wawannu de honona .
He who swears by the temple , swears by it and by him who has been living in it . ||| Ne la'pa hameni nlokra hadom nwet la roma-krei , nnia'eratni de enakot oleka hade la roma-krei nor wutga Uplerlawna mak kden la ' roma-krei die .
He who swears by heaven , swears by the throne of God and by him who sits on it . ||| Ne la'pa riy ida nlokra pa nwet la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , nnia'eratni de nlokra hadella Uplerlawna mtatangenni ne la ' walia Uplerlawna mak kamtatan la ' hande .
Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! For you tithe mint , dill , and cumin , and have left undone the weightier matters of the law , justice , mercy , and faith . But you ought to have done these , and not to have left the other undone . ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru agama miora riy Parisi , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Mtiutga inonmi emeka riy kalwiedweda mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Yawuli-yatniamanmi emeknekama kio ' a-kamlaka de nhi'inde miala nhiakra id ralamni la termida sepersepuluh la ' a Uplerlawna . Miala de naplola mere miy edonna mpiadan nohora agama deullu-tatarni ononni emeknekama mtiulla-msiayni rimormior wialmi , mhioli-mliet la plol wawna , la'pa ida edon nollia ida . Maka plollola pa mhi ' nana de , de hota mliernohor ononni maka ha rwahakhaka inhatta re nor wut wualia yana mhioratdoin wal pia miala nhiakra id ralamni la termida sepersepuluh la ' a Uplerlawna .
You blind guides , who strain out a gnat , and swallow a camel ! ||| O'ta-mata miy , miy die emeka riy mak mat yata mak ktutga talla la riy dom to ' a . Yoma hya ' a maka agama ononni de miy edon mpiadan nohora , mere hya ' maka edon kwerat la Uplerlawna yamkekni de mimihakhak reria . Pa hota emolmolan nekama mi'na potpota mak kdella miy niemun genni ralamni demade mimtia ' i doinia la , mere hayori demade mliumu-mtielan nana .
Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! For you clean the outside of the cup and of the platter , but within they are full of extortion and unrighteousness . ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru agama me riy Parisi miy , adoh ! Hota mlier yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Mtiutga inonmi la riy kalwiedweda mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Mhi ' emeknekama riy maka kwuri-kohma lola-wra ' u wali to'orni mere ralamni re edonna rohma pa nakdeha-naktiahli ma'ta , yoma mtiot pa mpiehwa-mliakta emekneka riy kalwiedweda mere mimatmer la rira hyonni-hyanni me mimpiaror to ' inon wamuehemi .
You blind Pharisee , first clean the inside of the cup and of the platter , that its outside may become clean also . ||| Parisi miy die , mpiaho ' a-mpiahai niohora matmi yamkekni . Hota mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioinia nhiolmi yatyata re , ne plol toto ' a pa mpial lia riy kalwied wa . Totpa hota miy die emolmolan nekama riy mak ka'ala lolli-wra'nu me larni-kanni , pa nwuri-nohma momuoga ralamni re , totpena honona mana nmomuou . Yoma la'pa it ihranu ralamni nmou-nwitna de hota it wniehwani-liakatni hihi'ini-yapyapni mana rkalwiedwed wali .
Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! For you are like whitened tombs , which outwardly appear beautiful , but inwardly are full of dead men 's bones and of all uncleanness . ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru agama miora riy Parisi miy , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , yoma mtiutga inonmi emeka riy kalwiedweda mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Miy emeknekama hoi-kietra mak ha roh aur la pa yamkekni de samoga la tio'ora . Mere la ' ralamni de npenpuen niohora riy rurni-kliakallu mak kahuwu-kawoini .
Even so you also outwardly appear righteous to men , but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity . ||| Hota emeknek walima mtiot pa mpiehwa-mliakat emekneka riy kaplele'era mere nhiolmi-lietmi de to ' a yoma nhiolmi npenpuen niohora yatyatni-halalli .
Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! For you build the tombs of the prophets and decorate the tombs of the righteous , ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru agama me riy Parisi miy die , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , yoma mtiutga inonmi de emeka riy ploi-ple'era , mere plollolli de riy yatyata-halal miy . Nhi'inde mpiedia hoi-kietra la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu ululu me mhi ' samomuou wat tiutulu-au pidara tugu la ' a riy mak kaploloi-kaplele'era .
and say , ‘ If we had lived in the days of our fathers , we would n't have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets . ' ||| Me miwra , La'pa amor wut lia a up mamni-tgar mamni lerni mana , ami edonna mre ' wut pua mpunu-mpenna makwohorulu-ktatrulu re .
Therefore you testify to yourselves that you are children of those who killed the prophets . ||| Mere la ' miy lirmi re , mtiutga de miy di de riy mak kwunu-kwenna makwohorulu-ktatrulu duratni-waitni miy .
Fill up , then , the measure of your fathers . ||| Pede ndella pa mhiaur nohora upmi-tgarmi do'oni-halli pa nodi liarni totpena hota mlier la Uplerlawna niukamnu .
You serpents , you offspring of vipers , how will you escape the judgment of Gehenna ? ||| Miy die riy yatyat miy ! Pa hota emkameni totpena miy orgahami milewna inonmi la ' a niukmua ai mormiori ralamni ? !
Therefore , behold , I send to you prophets , wise men , and scribes . Some of them you will kill and crucify , and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city , ||| Mitlin samomuoga me ! Hota A ' u'enyatga makwohorulu-ktatrulu me riy maka ka ' o'ta-kakriahlu me tungkuru-tungkuru totpa rwahak pa mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioini do'omi-halmi . Mere hota mtiollia dom pa mpienna , me hota dom de mlia mpiairia la auwlakra hananni . Ne dom de hota miala ha ulti pa mliwra la ' a Yahudi re kreini-iskolli genni me mtiota pa mhiokar reria la ' leta id pa la ' leta ida .
that on you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth , from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah , whom you killed between the sanctuary and the altar . ||| La ' hade pede hota miy er mak kakwara wniunu-wnienna nwauga la ler maka upmi-tgarmi rwunu-rwenna Habel , ne rodi liarni la ' a wniunu-wnienna la riy korni honona mak khi ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni la ' pa ntutu-nte'ewa la ' ler maka rwenan walia makwohorulu-ktatrulu Sakaria , Berekia a'nani de , la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini nora katri'ana letgarni .
Most certainly I tell you , all these things will come upon this generation . ||| Pede mhioratrerio ! Nee ! Plol toto ' a pa wniunu-wnienna honona re , de hota tuwu di rakwar reria do ' a-hala re honona .
Jerusalem , Jerusalem , who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her ! How often I would have gathered your children together , even as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings , and you would not ! ||| Neee ! Makden Yerusalem miy ee ! Miy er mak kwunu-kwenna makwohorulu-ktatrulu me mpiatliewur wenna riy maka Uplerlawna Nhopna rtiy miy die . Makden Yerusalem miy ee ! A ' g e uhak memna olek la re'eni wo'ir meman pa Agiwra ghi ' miy pia emeknekama hiwi tei mak kreka-krek a'nani la liwarni nayanni , mere mihmena mitlin la A polpuo'lu .
Behold , your house is left to you desolate . ||| La ' hade pede mitlino ! Hota Uplerlawna Nolin limni la miy letmi .
For I tell you , you will not see me from now on , until you say , ‘ Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord ! ' ||| Pena miatgo , la ' ler di pa ntutu-nte'ela ler mak Amuai owa'ana , de hota , miy edon mimkek eti A ' u . La ' A maimia'yu lerni de nampena miwra , Makodia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni Nmai wiee ! Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi tlilili-tmamuawua !
Jesus went out from the temple , and was going on his way . His disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple . ||| La'pa Yesus Nran lakni la Uplerlawna roma kreini noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai pia rakot la , Tuna , Mumkek tek la Uplerlawna roma kreini de inponni me naruri .
But he answered them , You see all of these things , do n't you ? Most certainly I tell you , there will not be left here one stone on another , that will not be thrown down . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Yowa , Uplerlawna roma kreini de inpona me naruri . Mere totpena miatga , hya ' maka mimkeka ri , hota rweyata-rwaniawu momuoga . Wat muaka kapnidara re de hota id mana edonna nalliapar la id wawannu .
As he sat on the Mount of Olives , the disciples came to him privately , saying , Tell us , when will these things be ? What is the sign of your coming , and of the end of the age ? ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nla'awa wo'ora Saitun noma Namtatna la hande . Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rod tiemna pa ror Yesus rwahaur rewre'wa pa riwra , Tuna , Mpue'er nohor tek hare , mai ami hota mowen die itamkek mak Omukota re ? Me hota hya ' ed maka tamkek ulga totpena nwagahniort it la O maimiaimu me noha niatni nrehgor wua ?
Jesus answered them , Be careful that no one leads you astray . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mi'ererma ! Yanpa riy rhi ' aklierat miy la ' a A maimia'yu de .
For many will come in my name , saying , ‘ I am the Christ , ' and will lead many astray . ||| Hota rirahu rmai die rnairia A na'nu pa riwra , Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru A ' g inhatti ! Hota rirahu rpesiaya ir pa rler la klieratni .
You will hear of wars and rumors of wars . See that you are n't troubled , for all this must happen , but the end is not yet . ||| Hota mitlina poka hidara yetni warna me mliernana kota-de'eta de rira riwra wunu-ara e nwewr olek la noha-rai , mere emkade ho'mana yan mimta'ata . Yoma hota hare honona de plollola pa itamkeka me itatlina , mere noha niatni edon ntutu-nte ' ma'ta .
For nation will rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom , and there will be famines , plagues , and earthquakes in various places . ||| Hota hairi nor hairi rawunu-rawenna , me noha-rai nora noha-rai rawo'ora . Ne hota rehka-lara nwewar la noha-rai , me noha nruru upkarururu lol meni-meni .
But all these things are the beginning of birth pains . ||| Hare honona de tamkeka pleinia mere edon rler ma't la noha niatni . Ler maka mimkek la hare de eneknek to'ama mulaliaini , pa emekto'ama patke ' a maka apannu namehra la mulaliaini , mere lerni edon ntu'tu ma'ta pa nayor a'nani .
Then they will deliver you up to oppression and will kill you . You will be hated by all of the nations for my name 's sake . ||| Hota la ' ler de rwatoran miy miak klernohor A ' u pa ral miy lia riy yatyata-halala pa rnahora-rnala ' a nanpena rwunu-rwenan miy . Hota la ' noha wawannu de noha-rai honona rahankeran rer tiy miy yoma mimliernohor reri A ' u .
Then many will stumble , and will deliver up one another , and will hate one another . ||| La ' ler de mana rirahu rhoitio'or doin-rtahnei dioin la pesiayni la A ' u . Ne rwaldioinia pa rtorna riy makpesiay mia'ta yoma sukni tia'ala na'nama rala la riy yatyata re pa ramuki-rama'ala .
Many false prophets will arise and will lead many astray . ||| La ' ler de wal pia riy rahu hota ralahar pa riwra ir de makwohorulu-ktatrulu ira pa rodi rirahu la klieratni .
Because iniquity will be multiplied , the love of many will grow cold . ||| Yatyata-halala na'ititar la liawanni pa narieiniande rirahu rakleha sniayni la rimormior wialli me edon ratlina-ratailla Uplerlawna .
But he who endures to the end will be saved . ||| Mere la'pa miy e mtiorrer pitpitga pesiaymi , de hota mliernana mormiori-lewlewna plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
This Good News of the Kingdom will be preached in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations , and then the end will come . ||| Ne Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a emkameni la Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka Ray , de hota rakotkot lola pa nwewar la noheri woru nayanni totpena riy honona ratga , nhor nianpena noha niata .
When , therefore , you see the abomination of desolation , which was spoken of through Daniel the prophet , standing in the holy place let the reader understand , ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu Daniela nakot nohora la ' ululu memna la ' a hya ' mak khi ' akdeha-aktiahlia gen lululi la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni narieiniande Uplerlawna Nawenna . Pede la'pa hya ' maka Daniela nakot nohora ntutu-nte'ela de , miy miaka mpiaik nana e lirni de mnia'erit nana lirni de nnia'eratni !
then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains . ||| Pa miy mak kden la Yudea miwlar lia wo'ora hananni .
Let him who is on the housetop not go down to take out the things that are in his house . ||| Me maka kateni anni la likti wawannu plet pa miwlari . Yana mhioratreria hya ' mak kden la roma ralamni pa miodia .
Let him who is in the field not return back to get his clothes . ||| La'pa miy mak kden la nhyi ' ralma de yana miwali pia miala lawarmi-rayanmi la ' a roma nayanni .
But woe to those who are with child and to nursing mothers in those days ! ||| Adoh ! La ' ler de pat mak ka'uhu-ka'apnu , ne la ' a pat mak nuh reria a'nani re rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni .
Pray that your flight will not be in the winter nor on a Sabbath , ||| Msiumbaini totpena yanpa miwlar liola otna-anni ralamni onde yanpa la ' a Sabat lerni .
for then there will be great suffering , such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now , no , nor ever will be . ||| Yoma lera-mela mak kodi kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a , yamuki-yama'ala mak emkade , de it edon tlernan etia la ' a ler maka Uplerlawna Na'ohi-na'ara nohkerna la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' ler de . Ne la'pa itleretia de , it edon tlernan emkade owa'ana .
Unless those days had been shortened , no flesh would have been saved . But for the sake of the chosen ones , those days will be shortened . ||| La'pa Uplerlawna Nala ler de pa naplahwa de hota riy id mana edonna ntuin tar lia noha wawannu yoma rmat miomuou . Mere onnila Uplerlawna sniayanni la mutnu-rahanu maka Nwalir niana re to ' a , maka nhi'nande ler de edonna nodi liarni .
Then if any man tells you , ‘ Behold , here is the Christ ! ' or , ‘ There ! ' do n't believe it . ||| La ' ler de la'pa riy riwra , Mai pia tamkek ee ! Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru ed olek diwa , onde dom e riwra , Ee , Ray Makamori-Kalewan de etla handelloo ! Yan mitlin la lirni re .
For false christs and false prophets will arise , and they will show great signs and wonders , so as to lead astray , if possible , even the chosen ones . ||| Yoma hota la lera re de rirahu ralahar pa riwra ir de de Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru onde rtot inonni emeka makwohorulu-ktatrulu pa rnairia hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak riy edon ramkek taru pa rtutga rurni-laini totpa ra ra'ohpa-ralahara rira . Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka Enwalir niana nekane , riwra rtot pa rler la klieratni .
Behold , I have told you beforehand . ||| Hade pede mhioratreria ! Dodo'ondi de A'ukot oleka hari tiy miy wia totpena hota la'pa hare honona rtutu-rte'ewa de miy edon mlier la klieratni .
If therefore they tell you , ‘ Behold , he is in the wilderness , ' do n't go out , or ‘ Behold , he is in the inner rooms , ' do n't believe it . ||| Pede la'pa riy rma rpo'on tiy miy riwra , A ' g e wuatrom nana Ray Makamori-Kalewan della ' wo'orletna-kawurloini , de yana miora pa mlia ' a . Onde la'pa riwra , Mai pia mlia mimkeka , e nade ' a la rom id ralamni . Yan memmemna mitail nohora .
For as the lightning flashes from the east , and is seen even to the west , so will the coming of the Son of Man be . ||| Yoma hota Rimormiori A'na A maimia'yu de riy honona plet pa rat niohora . Yoma Amuai die , emeknekama hita-tlena nkaili la ' a tipur matni , lairni ndain la warat matni .
For wherever the carcass is , that is where the vultures gather together . ||| Ne emeknekama tamkek nana iha lakma e ntapoi reria re , pa nahe ' niohora ya'ana , tat niohora mak kmati-kmolu etla hande , de emkade walia la'pa Amuai owa'an de riy honona rat niohor memna .
But immediately after the suffering of those days , the sun will be darkened , the moon will not give its light , the stars will fall from the sky , and the powers of the heavens will be shaken , ||| La'pa ler maka riy rler la kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a de nlardoinla dewade leretniekla , lera nwamuela ne wolla mana nakleh lair wia . Hota wtiona mana pala tuinia . Ne maka kodi plolli la darta-lyanti mana hota nawniatiri-nawnialiakra .
and then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky . Then all the tribes of the earth will mourn , and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky with power and great glory . ||| Nhor nianpena hya ' mak ktutga Rimormiori A'na A maimia'yu de nayamkek la lyanti ne hota la ' ler de noha-rai honona polpuolu-kakakria la noha wawannu . Hota honona ramkek reria Rimormiori A'na A ' Muai pia Adien la kakma wawannu , de Agodia A plo'lu-mneh ' u , A preh ' u-mka'yu mak kamehi-kayona la liplipni-kamka'mani .
He will send out his angels with a great sound of a trumpet , and they will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds , from one end of the sky to the other . ||| Hota Uplerlawna hopopanni neuga noknok lawna , ne Rimormiori A'na A ' die ghopan pa A hopopnu mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha rawoka-rale'ga A mu'tu-rah ' u maka Uplerlawna Nwalir nian oleka , mak kdella noha uhunu-lyanti ewatni .
Now from the fig tree learn this parable , When its branch has now become tender and produces its leaves , you know that the summer is near . ||| Mia'ala wniatutu-wniaye ' a la kar on de . La'pa mtiamnia olli demade nmor wia , de miatg oleka lerwarnu nwakrian wia .
Even so you also , when you see all these things , know that he is near , even at the doors . ||| Hota emkade wal lia mimkeka hare honona mak A'ukot nohor olek diwa , de miatg oleka de lerni-melli nhi ' pa nwakrian wia .
Most certainly I tell you , this generation will not pass away until all these things are accomplished . ||| Totpa miatga ! Riy la ' tuwu di edon rmat mia'ta , de hare honona mak ukot nohor oleka di hota rtutu-rte'ewa . A li'ru ri raplola .
Heaven and earth will pass away , but my words will not pass away . ||| Hota lyanti nora nohkeran di mana rmolu-rhelam wa mere A li'ru-tu'nu de ndella pa nodi liarni .
But no one knows of that day and hour , not even the angels of heaven , but my Father only . ||| Riy id ho'mana hota naplin niohora la ' a hya ' lera-hya ' mela Rimormioria A'na A maimia'yu owa'ana . Uplerlawna hopopanni nekane raplinga , Uplerlawna A'nani A ' ho'mana uplinga . Eneknek to'ama , A'mu la Ilyamou-Watyatoha nampena ed mak katga .
As the days of Noah were , so will the coming of the Son of Man be . ||| La'pa Rimormiori A'na A maimia'yu de rimormiori yehwani emolmolan nekama la it upni Nuh tuwnu la ' ler ululu .
For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and drinking , marrying and giving in marriage , until the day that Noah entered into the ship , ||| La ' lera ger wawuau edonan ma'ta , de rimormiori rtepartarlia ya'ana-yemnu la lera-lera , me rmehlima-rmarya ' a . Emkade nekpa nodi liarni pa la'pa nte ' meman la Nuh nler la aupual liawna batra ralamni .
and they did n't know until the flood came and took them all away , so will the coming of the Son of Man be . ||| La'pa nte'ela ger wawuau liawan de nmai wia dewade nwau dioin rimormiori mak edon kla ' teman la Nuh nor upni-a'nani , na'nama nhioratni rla ' temni . Hota emkade walia la'awa lerni maka Rimormiori A'na A ' Muai owa'ana .
Then two men will be in the field , one will be taken and one will be left . ||| Hota la ' ler de de riy worg e rtepartarlia kniari la ' a nhyi ' ralma , de hota ralewna riy mak klernohor A ' u mere mutwualli de edonna ralewan nana yoma edon npesiay A ' u .
Two women will be grinding at the mill , one will be taken and one will be left . ||| Ne la'pa patke ' a worg e rtepartarlia rwotra wetra ' lawna , de hota mak klernohor A ' die ralewna , mere rhoitio'or doin mutwualli mak edon klernohora A ' u .
Watch therefore , for you do n't know in what hour your Lord comes . ||| Hade pede orahnioratmi ! Yoma miy e miplinga Orgahi-Orha ' a maimiaini .
But know this , that if the master of the house had known in what watch of the night the thief was coming , he would have watched , and would not have allowed his house to be broken into . ||| Mhioratreria ! Itala orrom id pa tsi ' a la yawalliohora . La'pa orroma nat niohora hya ' a lera-mela mak kamna ' a nma nkamna ' a la e romni , de hota edon nanina , me e natiak reri totpena mak kamna ' de yana na'unut nan e ' a .
Therefore also be ready , for in an hour that you do n't expect , the Son of Man will come . ||| La ' hade pede miy miana emkade wali . Mitiak reria ! Mitlin reri-mitail rer lia Uplerlawna lirni , yoma Rimormiori A'nani hota Amuai owa'an de , miy e miplin niohora ler meni-mel meni .
Who then is the faithful and wise servant , whom his lord has set over his household , to give them their food in due season ? ||| La ' hade pede mhi ' inonmi pa emeka hopopna-lili'iru maka riwra natu nhu'ru-nhelma me natu natlina-nataili . Hopopna mak emkade upni-matromni mana nran e ' pa nla ' o'tani la ' hopopanni-lili'irnu korni totpena e ' ed mak khakra mutwualli re ya'anni-yemannu la ' a lelera-melmela .
Blessed is that servant whom his lord finds doing so when he comes . ||| Hota hopopan mak kdenrer lia kniarni de hota nlernan unut lawna , yoma matromni nawal pia nmai die nlernan entepartarlia tulla-kniari .
Most certainly I tell you that he will set him over all that he has . ||| Mpiesiayo , hota upni-matromni de npesiaya riy de pede nran e ' pa nwal lia mak klina-kmata la e re'eni-tniarnu honona .
But if that evil servant should say in his heart , ‘ My lord is delaying his coming , ' ||| Mere hopopan mak kyata-khala de hota nwarora la ralamni hota upni-matromni mahneka nanpena nawali .
and begins to beat his fellow servants , and eat and drink with the drunkards , ||| Pede nliwra-nkaklia hopopan walli re , ne na'ana-nemun wut lia riy mak ktepartarlia kpehera-kma'wu .
the lord of that servant will come in a day when he does n't expect it and in an hour when he does n't know it , ||| Dewade upni-matromni de nawal pia nmai wia la ' a lera-mel maka hopopan de naplin niohora .
and will cut him in pieces and appoint his portion with the hypocrites . That is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be . ||| Pa nhi'nande upni-matromni nukmua werwerta riy de ne nhokar doinia pa nre ' wut lia riy mak ktot pa nhi ' a plolli mere plollolli de riy yatyat ira munafik . Hota honona re rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni .
Then the Kingdom of Heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom . ||| La'pa nte'ela Rimormiori A'na A maimia'yu de , de hota Orgahi-Orha ' a yehwani la ' a mutnu-rahanu maka Enodi plolli la ira pa emeka Ray , de emeknekama la ' a yawalliohor di . De hota hararara termida maka ha rwalir tiar pua klernohor reria mak kmehlima , rla ' pa rima-rima ra'al wa'danu pa rla ' pa rwatroma a'na muanke ' a mak kmehlim de .
Five of them were foolish , and five were wise . ||| Ne la ' a harara termida re de riy wolima e rpodku ne riy wolim de ratu .
Those who were foolish , when they took their lamps , took no oil with them , ||| Harara matlimlima mak podku re rodia wa'danu genni mere edonna rodia wu'ru ya'itarni .
but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps . ||| Mere harara matlimlimni mak katu re rodia wa'danu me rod wialia wu'ru ya'itarni .
Now while the bridegroom delayed , they all slumbered and slept . ||| La'pa a'na muanke ' a maka kmehlim de nmai die mela nlawna , pa nreiniande hararar re rhoki-rtemna me ranina .
But at midnight there was a cry , ‘ Behold ! The bridegroom is coming ! Come out to meet him ! ' ||| La'pa mela nletargara na'nama rira riarni-riarin nohora mak kmehlim de nmai wia . Riarin pa riwra , Nmai wia , muanke ' a mak kmehlima nmai wio ! Mai pia twatrome !
Then all those virgins arose , and trimmed their lamps . ||| Harara re termida ema rhedga mata pa ra'itra wu'ru la wa'danu re .
The foolish said to the wise , ‘ Give us some of your oil , for our lamps are going out . ' ||| Noma harara mak podku re rakot la mak katu re riwra , Oi , mtiulan pa miwe'er nana a wa'du mamni ri , yoma a wa'du mamni ri wu'ranu nhi'pa nkeran wa .
But the wise answered , saying , ‘ What if there is n't enough for us and you ? You go rather to those who sell , and buy for yourselves . ' ||| Mere harara mak katu re rakot la riwra , El miy re , yan miwenna mere taken niana yoma hota mal tiy miy , mere hota he ' nal mai ami ? Mlia miwelia la ' a riy mak ka'olu wu'ru .
While they went away to buy , the bridegroom came , and those who were ready went in with him to the wedding feast , and the door was shut . ||| Noma mak kpodku re rla rawelia la ' mak ka'olu . La'pa ralala ' ma'ta de muanke ' a mak kmehlim de nte'ewa pa hararar mak katu re ror wutga mak kmehlima re pa rler la rialam la mak kmehlim de genni pa rho'la rwenta pinta puohra .
Afterward the other virgins also came , saying , ‘ Lord , Lord , open to us . ' ||| Nhor nia'nama hararar podku re rmai wia pa rtet la nhiari riwra , Tuna , tuna mhuar niana nhiari mai ami ee !
But he answered , ‘ Most certainly I tell you , I do n't know you . ' ||| Mere muanke ' a muaka kmehlim de niwra , Plollolli de , a'uplin niohor miy .
Watch therefore , for you do n't know the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man is coming . ||| Noma Yesus Nwatia lirni la lira yawalliohor de Niwra , La ' hade pede yan mininmi mere mitiaktiaka , yoma miy edonna miat niohora lera-mel maka hota A maimia'yu de ntutu-nte'ewa .
For it is like a man going into another country , who called his own servants and entrusted his goods to them . ||| Yesus Nakot owa'ana Niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a kniarni la ' a mutnu-rahanu re maka Enodi plolli la pa emeka Ray , de hota emekwalima yawalliohor di wali . Yoma hota Rimormiori A'na A maimia'yu de emolmolan nekama hota a'na muanke ' a ida niwra nla nhopal la olietleta pa hota nmai owa'ana . Edon nla nhopal ma'ta demade npolga hopopanni re na'nama nakot la re niwra , Mitiak reria a re ' u-tnia'ru ri honona me mi'ititar la .
To one he gave five talents , to another two , to another one , to each according to his own ability . Then he went on his journey . ||| Noma nala re'eni-tniarnu re la ' a hopopanni re de nlernohora rima-rima rurni-laini . La ' riy idni de nala talenta wolima kupna 170 kilu . Ne la riy wornu de nala talenta woru kupna 68 kilu . Ne la riy wotellu de nala talenta ida kupna 34 kilu . Nhor nioma nhopal wa .
Immediately he who received the five talents went and traded with them , and made another five talents . ||| Dewade mak klernana kupna talenta wolima de nleretniekla nla na'olu-nala ' a wa pa na'unut nana ralamni re'eni woru .
In the same way , he also who got the two gained another two . ||| Emkade wal lia mak klernana kupna talenta wor die pa nlernana unatnu ralamni re'eni wor wuali .
But he who received the one talent went away and dug in the earth and hid his lord 's money . ||| Mere mak klernana kupna talenta ida , nla ' pa nah tiani na'nama nhuwria kupan maha maka upni-matromni nala re !
Now after a long time the lord of those servants came , and settled accounts with them . ||| La'pa mahnek meman na'nama upa-matrom de nawali pia rakot nohora maha re .
He who received the five talents came and brought another five talents , saying , ‘ Lord , you delivered to me five talents . Behold , I have gained another five talents in addition to them . ' ||| Noma maka klernana talenta wolim de nmai pia nala kupna talenta termid la upni-matromni de . Noma nakot la matromni niwra , Tuna , kupna talenta wolim maka omuala re de a ' g e liernana untu talenta wolima pa erti .
His lord said to him , ‘ Well done , good and faithful servant . You have been faithful over a few things , I will set you over many things . Enter into the joy of your lord . ' ||| Noma matromni nakot la , Samoga ! O ' di de hopopna mak katlina-kataili pa o samo'wu . Yoma la ' kuku'uni di de apuesiay olek o wa . Hota mak inponni ho'mana a ' g e puesiay wialia o ' a . Mmuai wia rialma pa ta'an wutu-temun wutu pa tamuki-tahepru .
He also who got the two talents came and said , ‘ Lord , you delivered to me two talents . Behold , I have gained another two talents in addition to them . ' ||| Noma hopopan mak klernana kupna talenta wor die mana nler walia rialam pa nakot la matromni de niwra , Tuna , kupna talenta woru mak omuala re de a ' g e liernana owa'ana untu talenta woru pa erti !
His lord said to him , ‘ Well done , good and faithful servant . You have been faithful over a few things . I will set you over many things . Enter into the joy of your lord . ' ||| Noma tun die niwra , Samoge ! O ' di de hopopna mak katlina-kataili pa o samo'wu . Yoma la ' ha kuku ' di mere apuesiay olekwa pa hota la ha lalawna mana a ' g edonna umta'ata . Mmuai wia rialma pa ta'an wut lia handi pa tamuki-tahepru .
He also who had received the one talent came and said , ‘ Lord , I knew you that you are a hard man , reaping where you did n't sow , and gathering where you did n't scatter . ||| Nhor nioma hopopan mak klernana kupan talenta id de nmai pia nakot la upni-matromni de niwra , Tuna yan muwenna me . Agatga de riy o'ta tehra id o ' a . Hota tuna nleretniekla netia ha wo ' a maka tuna edonna ntamin nana , me tuna nwokwiok niekpa na'ana hawo ' a-hawehra maka edonna mrieiki-mpuo'ora .
I was afraid , and went away and hid your talent in the earth . Behold , you have what is yours . ' ||| Pede a'umta'ata yanpa tuna nawenan mai a ' u . Kupan maka tuna nala re de a lia gahia tani na'nama aghuwria pa orgahamu mumkek memna kupna talenta memeh ' a maka omuala mai a ' di , de edonna nayawo ' a ne erti pa orgahamu mua'ala .
But his lord answered him , ‘ You wicked and slothful servant . You knew that I reap where I did n't sow , and gather where I did n't scatter . ||| Tun de nakot la , Hoi riy inon wertu ne , riy yatyata id o ' a me ! O ' e muat wualia de a ' g edonna uwuli-utniamni mere agetlia ha wo ' a ? ! Me a ' g e rieiki-wuo'ora la ' a gen miaka awokwiok niekpa arieik wa ? !
You ought therefore to have deposited my money with the bankers , and at my coming I should have received back my own with interest . ||| La ' a plollolli mana omkienia a kupnu rella noha luwuaunu wniatierun lawanni bank totpena amuai emkadi de orgah ' u ga ' nana kupan de nor wutga rehenu-lawanni bunga .
Take away therefore the talent from him and give it to him who has the ten talents . ||| Noma nakot la hopopanni dom to ' a niwra , Oi , mua'ala kupna re la ' e ' a pa muala la riy maka gahani kupan talenta termida re .
For to everyone who has will be given , and he will have abundance , but from him who does n't have , even that which he has will be taken away . ||| Yoma he ' mak khima-kre ' a lia kalwiedwedni de ir er maka klernan owa'an pa ra'itar rer lia liawanni . Mere maka edon nhima-nre ' a lia kalwiedwedni , de hota ha kuku ' id etla limni ralamni ho'mana ra ' momuou lia .
Throw out the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness , where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth . ' ||| Ne hopopan maka edon kdenreri de ratra la ' a melmelli-kalkalamni mak kden la pliorni , totpena nler la polpuol inni-wakwak amni .
But when the Son of Man comes in his glory , and all the holy angels with him , then he will sit on the throne of his glory . ||| La'pa Rimormiori A'na A Muai owa'an de hota Agodi plo'lu-mneh ' u . Ne hota A hopopna-lili'iru honona rlidan nohora-rtaur nohora A ' u . Hota A'umtatn A lia liwange'nu-mtatange'nu , maka hitita-homomra .
Before him all the nations will be gathered , and he will separate them one from another , as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats . ||| Hota rimormiori honona mak kwatiawua hairi-hairi honona rawowioin la A ga'yu ralamni . Nhor nianpena Awuahakra rimormiori honona re la ' a nhiakra woru , de hota emeknekama makhuri-kwa'ana ral to ' a duma wokni la ' a pipi wokni .
He will set the sheep on his right hand , but the goats on the left . ||| Hota mak klernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni de Akenia la walli malganna ne mak edon klernohora re de Akenia la malwiru .
Then the King will tell those on his right hand , ‘ Come , blessed of my Father , inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world , ||| Nhor nia'nama Agodi plolli emeka Ray pa A'ukot la mak kden la A wa'lu malganna pa giwra , Hononmi mmiai , yoma A A'mu Nara ' a-napalga miy . Mai pia mliola rialam la ' a Uplerlawna gen warwuarnu maka Ha Nwahi ' targa tiy miy la ' a ler maka Uplerlawna Na'ohi-na'ara nohkerna-rai miaran di .
for I was hungry and you gave me food to eat . I was thirsty and you gave me drink . I was a stranger and you took me in . ||| Yoma la ' lerni la A'uplara , de mimial pa A'una , me A tie'ru kerna de mial pa Agemnu . Me la ' lerni A'uhulti-uhamra , de mhiaria nhiari mai A ' u .
I was naked and you clothed me . I was sick and you visited me . I was in prison and you came to me . ' ||| A'uniki-ulai mere miala naniair mai A ' u . Alier la nnieni-nhiena , miy er mak kodi atiawi mai A ' u . Alier la roma nhio'la ralamni de ma mtiomra-mniah ' a pa mtiulan mai A ' u .
Then the righteous will answer him , saying , ‘ Lord , when did we see you hungry and feed you , or thirsty and give you a drink ? ||| Noma riy mak kholi-kleta la plol wawna rakot ma A ' u , riwra , Matroma , mowenia mamkek nana Matro'mu Narehka-naplara pa amalla Matro'mu Na'ana-nemnu ?
When did we see you as a stranger and take you in , or naked and clothe you ? ||| Ne mowenia itwatrom de , Matro'mu emeknekama mak kahulti-kahamra pa amreiniana Matro'mu la a rom mamni ? Ne la ' hanmeni la amlernana Matro'mu de Muniki-mulai piede amala naniair pa Omhu'ru la ?
When did we see you sick or in prison and come to you ? ' ||| Me mowen pia amamkek nana Matro'mu temni nhi ' a onde Mdiella roma nhio'la pede am tiy mtulan tiy O ' a Matrome ?
The King will answer them , ‘ Most certainly I tell you , because you did it to one of the least of these my brothers , you did it to me . ' ||| Noma A'ukot la re , Totpena miatga , la ' a hya ' ed maka ha mhi ' a la A i'nu-na'ru mak kakleha weli ho'mana hade emekwalima mhi ' oleka harella mai A ' u .
Then he will say also to those on the left hand , ‘ Depart from me , you cursed , into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels , ||| Noma hota A'ukot la mak kden la A wa'lu malwiru re giwra , Ratar doin miy lia A wa'lu malwir di ! Hota mlier la nhiorghala-wniaghala ralamni la ai mormiori mak kmormior pia nodi liarni maka ha rhi ' targa la hegana amlawanni nor wutga hopopanni re , pa mior wutga la hande .
for I was hungry , and you did n't give me food to eat , I was thirsty , and you gave me no drink , ||| Yoma la ' lerni la A'urehka-uplara de miy edonna mial pa a'una-gemnu .
I was a stranger , and you did n't take me in , naked , and you did n't clothe me , sick , and in prison , and you did n't visit me . ' ||| La ' lerni la A'uhulti-uhamra mana miy edonna mrieinian A lia miy likatmi . Uniki-ulai miana miy edonna mhierun nana A naniai'ru la A te'mu , me Adiella roma nhio'la me Alier la mehra-mau mana miy edonna mtiomra-mniah ' a pa mtiulla-msiayn A ' u .
Then they will also answer , saying , ‘ Lord , when did we see you hungry , or thirsty , or a stranger , or naked , or sick , or in prison , and did n't help you ? ' ||| Noma mak kden la malwiru re rakot la riwra , Matroma , mowenia amamkeka Omuplara me tiermu kerna pa ami edonna mal pa Mu'una-muemnu ? Onde O ' emolmolan neka mak kahulti-kahamra onde mak kaniki-kalai onde mak kamehra-kamau me maka kden la roma nhio'la ralamni pa ami edonna mtomra-mnah ' a pa mtulla-msayn O ' a ?
Then he will answer them , saying , ‘ Most certainly I tell you , because you did n't do it to one of the least of these , you did n't do it to me . ' ||| Noma A'ukot la giwra , Totpena miatga , la'pa miy edonna mhima-mrie ' a A i'nu-na'ru mak kakleh weli , de emekwalima miy edon mhima-mrie ' olek A ' u .
These will go away into eternal punishment , but the righteous into eternal life . ||| Pede hota rala niukum lawna ra rukmua hare pa nodi liarni , mere la'pa riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni de hota rmormiori lia mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
When Jesus had finished all these words , he said to his disciples , ||| La'pa Yesus Nwatutga hare honona pa nhorwua noma Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra ,
You know that after two days the Passover is coming , and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified . ||| Hyal miy re , miatg oleka wa tre ' ma'ta lera woru na'nama lerlalawna Yahudi ntutu-nte'ewa , de Paska lerni maka Yahudi re rhoratreria tuini-wedni la ' ler maka ha rlergot la Mesir . Ne hota la ' ler de Rimormiori A'na A ' die , ral A ' pua la'pa rwairia A lia auwlakra hananni .
Then the chief priests , the scribes , and the elders of the people were gathered together in the court of the high priest , who was called Caiaphas . ||| La ' ler de imam-imam o'tani-matni ror wutga Yahudi in letni-am letni rawok la Kayafas likatni , la ' a imam lawna Kayafas genni .
They took counsel together that they might take Jesus by deceit and kill him . ||| E rawok pa rna'ohma Yesus pa rtorna wunwunmua totpena rwenna .
But they said , Not during the feast , lest a riot occur among the people . ||| Mere riwra , Yan memmemna rhi ' a la ' a lera maka ha riwra ramuki-rahepur la re , yoma hota lima-rora kokokna-rariarni .
Now when Jesus was in Bethany , in the house of Simon the leper , ||| La'pa Yesus Nden la leta Betania , la ' a Simon maka ululu de klernana nnienia ulityata genni .
a woman came to him having an alabaster jar of very expensive ointment , and she poured it on his head as he sat at the table . ||| Noma patke ' ida nmai Yesus de , de nodia potla ida maka ha rhi ' nana la watu-watu mak welli werta , de npenpuen lia wu'ru huwua mikmikri mak welli werwerta wali . La'pa Yesus Nana'an reri dewade pat de nwalia wu'ru della Yesus o'tani wawannu .
But when his disciples saw this , they were indignant , saying , Why this waste ? ||| La'pa maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramkek nana hade dewade rawenna . Riwra , Hya ' ed mak krei piede nhuri-nwal dioinia wu'ru mak kalwel wierwerat dena ? !
For this ointment might have been sold for much and given to the poor . ||| La'pa na'olga wu'ru de ho'mana nlernan kupna harahu pa welli de hota rala la riy maka kakleha-kaplara .
However , knowing this , Jesus said to them , Why do you trouble the woman ? She has done a good work for me . ||| Mere Yesus Natg oleka hya ' maka irakota noma Nakot la re , Hyal miy re , nihya'pa mikot emkade la patke ' dina ? ! Hade nhi ' a ha samomuou mai A ' u . Miolin doin e ' pa nhi ' samomuou A lia dodo'ondi to ' a
For you always have the poor with you , but you do n't always have me . ||| yoma A ' g edon gor miy pia nodi liarni . Mere riy makakleha-kaplara re nhi'inde e ror wutga miy totpa mtiulan la ' ira .
For in pouring this ointment on my body , she did it to prepare me for burial . ||| Ha nwalia wu'ru de pa na nwahi ' A ' pua rtamni A ' u .
Most certainly I tell you , wherever this Good News is preached in the whole world , what this woman has done will also be spoken of as a memorial of her . ||| Mpiesiayo , la'pa rakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la noh di wawannu uhunu-ewatni , de irakot nohor walia patke ' de hihi'ini-yapyapni totpa rira rhoratrereria e ' a .
Then one of the twelve , who was called Judas Iscariot , went to the chief priests ||| Noma la ' riy id la ' a riy termida wehrani woru maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re de nwawa Yudas Iskariot nla imam re o'tani-matni pa
and said , What are you willing to give me if I deliver him to you ? So they weighed out for him thirty pieces of silver . ||| nod lir la re niwra , Am miy re , hota hya ' ed maka miala mai a ' u totpena agala Yesus tiy miy ? Noma rpair nieka kupan pi'ra terampwotelu tututu pa rala la Yudas .
From that time he sought opportunity to betray him . ||| Noma Yudas nla nwahakhak talla emkameni pa ntorna Yesus totpena nala la Yahudi o'tani-matni re .
Now on the first day of unleavened bread , the disciples came to Jesus , saying to him , Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover ? ||| La ' a lera yanullu la lerlalawna maka Yahudi re ha ra'ana roti mak kakleha tgo ' a , noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai pia rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , hota ampahi ' targa ya'anlawna-yemunlawna itodi itsoratreria it tuini-wedni la ' Mesir de la ' hanmeni ?
He said , Go into the city to a certain person , and tell him , ‘ The Teacher says , My time is at hand . I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mlia ' letlawna pa mikot la riy ida maka A'ukot targ oleka tiy miy , pa mikot la miwra , Hyalia , it tungkurnu Niwra Ntu'tg olek la lerni pa hota Enmat wia . Pede Eniwra Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhi ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna Paska la ' a o rommu di .
The disciples did as Jesus commanded them , and they prepared the Passover . ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhi ' a hya ' ed maka Yesus Nakota rella . Noma rla ' pa rwahi ' a-rwayod tiarga ya'ana-yemnia Paska .
Now when evening had come , he was reclining at the table with the twelve disciples . ||| La'pa nmel wa , noma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani woru re ra'an wut lia mei wawannu .
As they were eating , he said , Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me . ||| La'pa rtepartarlia ya'ana dewade Yesus Nakot la re , Mpiesiayo ! Hota la ' riy id tiy miy die hota eniwra na'olga A ' u .
They were exceedingly sorrowful , and each began to ask him , It is n't me , is it , Lord ? ||| La'pa ratlin nan hade de honona rmalui-rmaher doin la . Dewade rima-rima ratiana Yesus riwra , Matroma , hota a ' g edonno ?
He answered , He who dipped his hand with me in the dish will betray me . ||| Yesus Niwra , Riy maka kor rewre'wa A ' pua mto ' wutga roti la ' a lari niemun geni pa emeka tema raralamni nhi'inde rhi ' a , de hota e ' ed mak ka'olg A ' u .
The Son of Man goes even as it is written of him , but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is betrayed ! It would be better for that man if he had not been born . ||| Plola , hota Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota Amuati , emeknekama e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni . Mere hota la'pa he ' ed mak ka'olga Rimormior A'na de , adoh ! Riy de hota nler meman la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Samomuounu de edon ra ' a'n nan walia e ' la noh di wawannu .
Judas , who betrayed him , answered , It is n't me , is it , Rabbi ? He said to him , You said it . ||| Noma Yudas mak kiwra na'olga Yesus nakot la Yesus niwra , Tungkurga , a ' niek de edonno ? Noma Yesus Nakot la , Plollolli de o ' a !
As they were eating , Jesus took bread , gave thanks for it , and broke it . He gave to the disciples and said , Take , eat , this is my body . ||| La'pa rara'an reri noma Yesus Na'ala roti , na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna . Nhor nioma Nhawi-nhawia rot die na'nama Nhakre'era la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re na'nama Niwra , Mia'ala pa mi'ina . Hadi de A ino'nu inhatti .
He took the cup , gave thanks , and gave to them , saying , All of you drink it , ||| Nhor nia'nama Na'ala lari maka rkeni anggur turnu na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna na'nama Nala maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , me Niwra , Hononmi mnimit la miemnu .
for this is my blood of the new covenant , which is poured out for many for the remission of sins . ||| Yoma A ra'ru inhatti maka khi ' a aplola Uplerlawna nnio ' warwuarnu me rar maka ha rhuria pa Namou-nawitna riy liawanni .
But I tell you that I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on , until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father 's Kingdom . ||| Mpiesiaya , hota A ' g edonna gemnu owa'ana anggur turnu pa la'pa nte'ela ' lerni Agor miy pia temun wutga anggur tur warwuarnu la ' a A A'mu genni maka Ntorna-nrautu emeka Ray .
When they had sung a hymn , they went out to the Mount of Olives . ||| Nhorwua noma rwahniara nhiara ya'uli-yawedi id la Uplerlawna . Nhor diewade rla'awa la ' a wo'ora Saitun .
Then Jesus said to them , All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight , for it is written , ‘ I will strike the shepherd , and the sheep of the flock will be scattered . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Hota la ' mel di nekpa miy hononmi miwlar dioinia A lia yoma la ' a rira hihi'ini yatyatni mai A ' u . Yoma Puka ralamni de e nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni niwra , Hota Awuenna makhuri-kwa'an de ne hota nhiuri-wnia'anni knunu-knera .
But after I am raised up , I will go before you into Galilee . ||| Mere la'pa ramori-ralewna A ' g owa'ana de hota A ' g e ula ' ul miy lia Galilea .
But Peter answered him , Even if all will be made to stumble because of you , I will never be made to stumble . ||| Noma Petrus nakot la Yesus , Pen neka mutu korni hota rawlar dioinia O la Tuna , mere a ' di de akti id mana a ' g edonna wuadur la O ' onmu .
Jesus said to him , Most certainly I tell you that tonight , before the rooster crows , you will deny me three times . ||| Mhuoratreria Petrusa . Plola la ' mel di memna de hota hiwi lallu edonna nkukule ' ma'ta de , hota omueh ' a nekpa mrieher doin A lia ' re'eni wotelu .
Peter said to him , Even if I must die with you , I will not deny you . All of the disciples also said likewise . ||| Mere Petrus nakot la Yesus Niwra , La'pa it rewre'wa tler la wniunu-wnienna ho'mana hota a ' g edonna ga ' pua rieher doinia O ' a Am ee ! Ne maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re honona mana lirni emekwalima Petrus lirni .
Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane , and said to his disciples , Sit here , while I go there and pray . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rla'awa geni ida mak kwawa Getsemani . La'pa rden la hande noma Enakot la ira , Mpiei pia mimtatan la handi . Pena A lia siumbaini .
He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee , and began to be sorrowful and severely troubled . ||| Noma Nakot la Petrus nora Sebedeus a'nani rora , de Yakowsi nor Yohansi pa rmemeh ' a ror rewre'wa E ' pa rla ' a . La ' mel de Yesus ralamni Nmayo ' a-nmataw dioin la .
Then Jesus said to them , My soul is exceedingly sorrowful , even to death . Stay here and watch with me . ||| Noma Nakot la mutwualli re Niwra , A ralmu emeka nmolu-nhelma pa emeknekama hota Amuat mie ! Mdien nek la handi pa mimatmat pa msiumbaini .
He went forward a little , fell on his face , and prayed , saying , My Father , if it is possible , let this cup pass away from me , nevertheless , not what I desire , but what you desire . ||| Noma Yesus Nla oliet kuku ' a la ' a gen die na'nama Nler inonni pa Nwaltiora-nwaltieman la tani wawannu pa Nsumbain Niwra , Am ee ! Awuak pa Ompuayow de , Muhal doinia kropna-krieutu mak hota Atiutulu-lielew niana ri . Mere yana Mliernohor maka A ralmu ha nwaka mere plolli nek tiy O'owa Ama !
He came to the disciples and found them sleeping , and said to Peter , What , could n't you watch with me for one hour ? ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nawal pia Nla Ntomar la mutwualli re wotelu , mere Nla ' de wotelu e ranin hala . Noma Yesus Nakot la Petrus Niwra , Eneknek to'ama jama id ho ' pa taken niana mimatar nohor A ' u ? !
Watch and pray , that you do n't enter into temptation . The spirit indeed is willing , but the flesh is weak . ||| Mimatmat pa msiumbaini totpena yana hegana amlawanni nreh nian miy pia mlier la do ' a-hala ralamni . Yoma plolli pa miy miwra mliernohor A ralma-rio'ru mere ta'en niana mhi ' nana .
Again , a second time he went away and prayed , saying , My Father , if this cup ca n't pass away from me unless I drink it , your desire be done . ||| Noma Yesus Nla Nsumbaini owa'ana pa Niwra , Ame ! La'pa Omiwra yawuhi-yawe'et di ntut nian A ' u , de taken niana Awuaniklia-wuayotlia de , mere nden nek la O wa Ama .
He came again and found them sleeping , for their eyes were heavy . ||| Noma Yesus Nawali owa'an pa Nla Ntomar la mutwualli re wotelu mere e rtepartar yanina yoma matni werat rehia .
He left them again , went away , and prayed a third time , saying the same words . ||| Pede Yesus Nal targ owa'ana la re'eni wotellu pa lirni la Amni de emkade wali .
Then he came to his disciples and said to them , Are you still sleeping and resting ? Behold , the hour is at hand , and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners . ||| Nhor nioma Nawali owa'an pa Nmai pia Nakot la mutwualli re Niwra , Minin ma'ta miy ? ! Mitlina ! Nte'ela lerni wa pa Rimormiori A'na A ' die ra'olga A lia riy maka khi ' do ' a-hala .
Arise , let 's be going . Behold , he who betrays me is at hand . ||| Mimata , mai pia tla ' pa twatroma riy mak ka'olga A ' u , nmai wia dee !
While he was still speaking , behold , Judas , one of the twelve , came , and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs , from the chief priests and elders of the people . ||| La'pa Yesus Ntepartar mua'ta la yaltieri , dewade Yudas maka nhi'inde kre'ela maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a la riy termida wehrani woru re , enmai wia , de nor wutga riy mutlialawna woka ida , de rodia wehla plalahwa , me aukakaklu . Imam o'tani-matni re me Yahudi in letni-am letni er mak khopan pa mutu rmai pia rtorna Yesus .
Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign , saying , Whoever I kiss , he is the one . Seize him . ||| Me Yudas mana Nakot targ oleka la mutnu re hota hya ' ed maka ha nhi ' a , niwra , Mitlina , tla ' de , de la'pa hameni ed maka akinnia de E ' inhatta pa mtiorna !
Immediately he came to Jesus , and said , Greetings , Rabbi ! and kissed him . ||| Pa la'pa rte'ela gen die , dewade Yudas nod tiemna Yesus pa nakot la , Kalwiedo tungkurge ! Dewade nkinnia Yesus .
Jesus said to him , Friend , why are you here ? Then they came and laid hands on Jesus , and took him . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Temana , pleta-plet pa omliernohora o ralma-riormu mak kariei pia ommuai handi ! Dewade riy mutlialawna re rma rwarui Yesus pa rtorna .
Behold , one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand and drew his sword , and struck the servant of the high priest , and cut off his ear . ||| Noma Yesus mutwualli ida nleh dioinia wehlani pa ndawar doinia riy ida tlinni . Riy de nhi ' hopopna la imam-imam re o'ta lawanni .
Then Jesus said to him , Put your sword back into its place , for all those who take the sword will die by the sword . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la mutwualli de Niwra , Hoi ! Mkieni owa'an wehlamu della paro'oni . Yoma riy meni mak kahe'iya wehla de hota wehla na'an owa'ana e ' a .
Or do you think that I could n't ask my Father , and he would even now send me more than twelve legions of angels ? ||| Omuat niekame ta'en niana Agharia A li'ru la A A'mu totpena Nalewan nan A ' u ? ! Hota Nleretniekla Na'enyatga hopopna malaikat mak ka'ara lidna termida wehrani woru rehenu totpa hopopanni-lili'irnu re rmai pa rtulan mai A ' u .
How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so ? ||| Mere la'pa hota emkade , de hota emkameni la Puka lirni mak kakot nohora A matmia'tu mak emkadi , de hota ntutu-nte'ewa ?
In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes , Have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me ? I sat daily in the temple teaching , and you did n't arrest me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la riy mutlialawna re Niwra , Hoi hya ' nrei pia miodia wehla ara me kakaklu re ma mtiorn A ' u ? ! Yanpa la ' miy wniarormi de A ' di de riy yatyata-halala id A ' u ? ! Lera-ler de A ' g e wuatutu-wuaye'ela Uplerlawna roma kreini mere miy edonna mtiorn A ' u .
But all this has happened that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled . Then all the disciples left him and fled . ||| Mere ha rhi ' emkade totpa naplol nohor la makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni la ' Puka ralamni . Nhor nioma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re honona rawlar dioin E ' pa kni'ini-kniewarni .
Those who had taken Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest , where the scribes and the elders were gathered together . ||| Mak ktorna Yesus re rodia Yesus pa rla ' a imam-imam o'ta lawanni Kayafas de . La ' hande de makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ror wut nieka Yahudi in letni-am letni re rawok tar momuog olekwa .
But Peter followed him from a distance to the court of the high priest , and entered in and sat with the officers , to see the end . ||| Petrus de nlernohor reria Yesus , mere edon nwakriania . Noma Petrus nwakdie'da wal pia nodi liarni la riwta ralamni la ' a imam lawna romni , pa nre ' pa namtatan wutga la ' riy mak katiak la ' hande . Petrus ralma-riorni de nlernohora , totpena nat muemna hya ' maka hota ha rhi ' nana la Yesus .
Now the chief priests , the elders , and the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus , that they might put him to death , ||| Imama re o'tani-matni la'pa mak ktorna agama watghudni honona , rahak riy mak kaprir niohora ira totpa ralahar pa rwaghal Yesus totpena rlernan talan pa rukum penna E ' a .
and they found none . Even though many false witnesses came forward , they found none . But at last two false witnesses came forward ||| Riy harahu rmai pia rakot nohora hya ' ed maka edon kaplola , mere o'ta-mata re edonna rlernana wniatikilgeni totpena rwaghala Yesus . Noma la hohoni dewade riy woru rler la gaini .
and said , This man said , ‘ I am able to destroy the temple of God , and to build it in three days . ' ||| Na'nama riwra , Hadi de ed mak kiwra E ' ed mak karuri-kalai pia kweyata-kwaniawua Uplerlawna roma kreini de , me hota E rurni-laini etla pa Nariri owa'ana krei die la ' a lera wotellu .
The high priest stood up and said to him , Have you no answer ? What is this that these testify against you ? ||| Noma imam lawna naprir pia nakot la Yesus Niwra , Hoi , hota O edonna Mukot hadom pa Mpuahla nana lira mak kwatiawua etnu-liolli rena ? Lira re raplola me edonna ?
But Jesus stayed silent . The high priest answered him , I adjure you by the living God that you tell us whether you are the Christ , the Son of God . ||| Mere Yesus edon Nakot hadomdoma . Noma imam lawna nhari owa'an lirni pa niwra , Aliokar la Uplerlawna mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nodi liarni , totpa Mutlina . Mpuer tek nurmu la a yatia'nu dina ! Hota O ' di de Ray Makamori-Kalewna O ' a maka Uplerlawna ha Nano'taru , de , Uplerlawna A'nani ?
Jesus said to him , You have said so . Nevertheless , I tell you , after this you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power , and coming on the clouds of the sky . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Emeknekama o lirmu de . Mere miy hononmi mpiesiayo ! Hota la ' ler id de hota mimkek memna , Rimormiori A'na A'umtatan la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kodi plolli walli malganna ne hota Amuai die Agodia kakma la ' a lyanti tutulu .
Then the high priest tore his clothing , saying , He has spoken blasphemy ! Why do we need any more witnesses ? Behold , now you have heard his blasphemy . ||| Dewade imam lawan de nawenan pa nlihira-nnaiya rain plalah wamueheni yoma nwarora de Yesus de rimormior tio ' E ' a , na'nama niwra , Adoh ! Riy di e nalernu-naha ' a Uplerlawna kotni-nanni yoma Enakot Niwra Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a . Yan itwei pia riy rakot nohora E halli . Miy hononmi e mitlin walia E lirni de e Napolu-naliella Uplerlawna toh ? !
What do you think ? They answered , He is worthy of death ! ||| Pa emkameni la miy ralma-riormi . Mietlia wa . Noma honona riarin pa riwra , Ha Nhi ' oleka do ' a-hal la Uplerlawna ! Niukamnu mak klol talanni de totpa rwunu-rwenna !
Then they spat in his face and beat him with their fists , and some slapped him , ||| Dewade krurui-kpirpir la Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama rdupla . Ne riy dom to ' a rmai pia rpahara malwiru-malganna Yesus killi .
saying , Prophesy to us , you Christ ! Who hit you ? ||| Rahe ' i-ramal niohor E ' a pa riwra , Hoi Ray Makamori-Kalewna nek O ' a maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru demade Mpuet tek la , he ' ed mak kpahara O ' a dena !
Now Peter was sitting outside in the court , and a maid came to him , saying , You were also with Jesus , the Galilean ! ||| Ne Petrus namtatan nek la ' a riwta ralamni la ' a imam lawna romni totpa nat niohora hota rhi ' a hya ' a la Yesus . Dewade pat makhoi-ktani ida nmai pia nakot la Petrus niwra , Nhi'inde omuor wutga riy mak kor Yesus riy Galilea de mila ' wutu .
But he denied it before them all , saying , I do n't know what you are talking about . ||| Mere Petrus nreher la ' honona re gaini ralamni niwra , A ' g e uplin niohora lirmu-tunmu de lie'erni .
When he had gone out onto the porch , someone else saw him and said to those who were there , This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth . ||| Noma Petrus nwatitin la hande pa nla'awa riwta nhiarni onni . Noma pat makhoi-ktani id to ' a nlol hande pa namkeka dewade nakot la riy mak kden hande niwra , Emekneka riy di dodo'ona e nor walia Yesus mak kwatiawua Nasaret de talla .
Again he denied it with an oath , I do n't know the man . ||| Noma Petrus nreher owa'an pa nlokra-nhautu niwra , Itmatromni Enamkek reri me a ' g edonna gat niohora riy de halolola .
After a little while those who stood by came and said to Peter , Surely you are also one of them , for your speech makes you known . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne riy mak kden hande rmai pia rakot la Petrus riwra , O inhatti manoo ! Yana mriehera , yoma ami e matlina o niareimu-wniahaurmu pede o ' a di mak klernohora Yesus inhatti !
Then he began to curse and to swear , I do n't know the man ! Immediately the rooster crowed . ||| Noma Petrus ntan limni la heyanan pa nlokra-nhautu niwra , Uplerlawna Namkek reria me a ' g edonna gat niohora riy de . Uplerlawna nhiakar lokarni mai a ' u la'pa agat niohora riy de ha lolola . Plinu-plinnianamde hiwi lallu nkukule'ewa
Peter remembered the word which Jesus had said to him , Before the rooster crows , you will deny me three times . Then he went out and wept bitterly . ||| na'nam de Petrus nhioratni nko ' i nana Yesus lirni de Niwra , Hota la hiwi lallu edon nkukule ' ma'ta de hota omrieher nan olek A lia re'eni wotel wua . Noma Petrus nlergot la gen die na'nama nahedge'du la kniakru .
Now when morning had come , all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death . ||| La'pa yawyawar ma'ta dewade imam-imam o'tani-matni honona rora Yahudi in letni-am letni rwahu'ru lira totpena retlia Yesus wnienanni .
They bound him , led him away , and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate , the governor . ||| Noma rwutga Yesus limni na'nama rodia la Pilatus , mak kla ' a gubernur it la Yudea la horta-hairia Romawi .
Then Judas , who betrayed him , when he saw that Jesus was condemned , felt remorse , and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders , ||| La'pa Yudas mak ka'olga Yesus de namkek de ir reti olek la Yesus niukamnu de hota rwenna , dewade Yudas ralamni nwaldioinia pa nmawal doinia la ' Yesus . Noma Yudas npolan doin owa'ana kupan pi'ra terampwotelu rella imam re o'tani-matni rora riy Yahudi re in letni-am letni
saying , I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood . But they said , What is that to us ? You see to it . ||| pa nakot la re , Aghi ' oleka do ' a-hal wa yoma a ' u'olga Yesus mere hade edon nhala . Ne dodo'ondi de rukum penna . Mere honona riwra , Amaplin niohora oleka hade wa . O yat wuamuehemu to ' hade .
He threw down the pieces of silver in the sanctuary and departed . Then he went away and hanged himself . ||| Noma Yudas nrinnia kupna rella krei ralamni na'nama nla ' pa orgahi nla nwair wen inonni .
The chief priests took the pieces of silver and said , It 's not lawful to put them into the treasury , since it is the price of blood . ||| Imama re o'tani-matni ratopla kupna re pa riwra , Kupna ri de , rara welli . Ne hota agama deullu-tatarni de niwra yana tal wutga la kupna krei .
They took counsel , and bought the potter 's field with them to bury strangers in . ||| Noma honona rwayow pa rnairia kupna pi'ra re pa ra rawelia tan miaka riy mak kayapi kekna-rana , gahani de . Rawelia tan die pa rhi ' a la do'ona-dakna tniamin matgenni .
Therefore that field has been called The Field of Blood to this day . ||| La ' hade pede la'awa dodo'ondi mana rweta tan die nanni de Rar Tani .
Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled , saying , They took the thirty pieces of silver , the price of him upon whom a price had been set , whom some of the children of Israel priced , ||| Ir hihi'ini-yapyapni de emekwalima la hya ' maka , makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yermia lirni la Puka ralamni e niwra , Ira ' nan neka kupan pi'ra terampwotelu tututu pa ra raweli E ' a . Riy Israel nekane rwayow nohora E welli de .
and they gave them for the potter 's field , as the Lord commanded me . ||| Ne kupan de irnairia pa ra rawel tiani maka riy mak kayapi kekna-rana gahani pa emeknekama Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakota mai a ' u .
Now Jesus stood before the governor , and the governor asked him , saying , Are you the King of the Jews ? Jesus said to him , So you say . ||| La ' pa Yesus Ntutrier lia Pilatus makla ' gubernur la hande , gaini ralamni . Noma Pilatus natiana Yesus Niwra , Plola O ' di de ray Yahudi id O ' a ? Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , Emek lir mak omukot de !
When he was accused by the chief priests and elders , he answered nothing . ||| Mere la'pa imama re o'tani-matni me Yahudi in letni-am letni re rwaghal E ' la Pilatus gaini mere Yesus lir ta ' a-waw ta ' a .
Then Pilate said to him , Do n't you hear how many things they testify against you ? ||| Noma Pilatus nakot la niwra , O e Mutlin nana irwaghal o'ola lira-tunu harahu me edonna ? !
He gave him no answer , not even one word , so that the governor marveled greatly . ||| Mere ir yaklakni emkade ho'mana , Yesus lir ta ' a-waw ta ' to'owa , pede gubernur Pilatus de nwer rer memna wawni .
Now at the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the multitude one prisoner whom they desired . ||| La ' a Yahudi lerlalawanni di maka ha rhoratreria tuini-wedni , de gubernur hairi Roma , Pilatus de , nhi'inde nolin doinia Yahudi id la ' a roma nhio'la totpena nhi ' ahepru Yahudi ralamni . Enolin doinia riy maka Yahudi mutlialawna re ha rwalir niana .
They had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas . ||| La ' ler di , de riy maka Yahudi liawanni rwalir niana de Barabas . E ' de mak kmalawna ray Romawi me Yahudi re rwetwet la e nanni .
When therefore they were gathered together , Pilate said to them , Whom do you want me to release to you ? Barabbas , or Jesus who is called Christ ? ||| Pede la'pa rirahu rawok taru , noma Pilatus natiana re niwra , Hota mimpiayow de he ' ed maka agolin doinia pa nawok temn owa'an tiy miy , Barabas , onde Yesus maka ha rweta la Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru ?
For he knew that because of envy they had delivered him up . ||| Pilatus natian emkare la rirahu re yoma Pilatus e nat niohora ina-ama leta re mniotni rala Yesus la e ' a , yoma honona re ralamni ramehra la Yesus .
While he was sitting on the judgment seat , his wife sent to him , saying , Have nothing to do with that righteous man , for I have suffered many things today in a dream because of him . ||| Mere la'pa Pilatus namtatan ma'ta la liwangeni nhiudi-pniara , de Pilatus patke'eni na'enyatga nnio ' id la Pilatus de niwra , Yan memmemna omrie'ela riy mak kwaghala riy di maka edonna khala . Yoma la ' hade pede a ' g e liernana mi ' a-lo ' a maka khi ' amta'at a lia ' orawi .
Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes to ask for Barabbas and destroy Jesus . ||| Mere imama re o'tani-matni rora riy Yahudi in letni-am letni rtekal rer tio ' la totpena rirahu rwaka Pilatus rolin doinia Barabas , ne rwahak pa rukum penna Yesus .
But the governor answered them , Which of the two do you want me to release to you ? They said , Barabbas ! ||| Noma Pilatus natian owa'ana re niwra , La ' ha rora ri de mimpiak hameni pa a'ulgota ? Noma honona rhaunu , Barabas !
Pilate said to them , What then shall I do to Jesus who is called Christ ? They all said to him , Let him be crucified ! ||| Hade emkade , aghi ' a hya ' a la Yesus maka ha rweta la Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru dina ? Noma honona rhaunu pa riwra , Mpuairia la auwlakra hananni !
But the governor said , Why ? What evil has he done ? But they cried out exceedingly , saying , Let him be crucified ! ||| Mere halli hya ' a pede ? Noma honona re yeher to ' pa rhaunu-rhaunu riwra , Mpuairia la auwlakra hananni !
So when Pilate saw that nothing was being gained , but rather that a disturbance was starting , he took water and washed his hands before the multitude , saying , I am innocent of the blood of this righteous person . You see to it . ||| La'awa hohoni de Pilatus nat muemna de taken niana e nhi ' hadomdoma , onnila riy riwra rhi ' kokokanni . Noma na'al gera pa nohma limni la rirahu re gaini ralamni pa ntutga de , e ' edon nre ' wut pua nwaghala riy mak edon khal di , na'nama niwra , Hota a ' g edonna ukwara hihi ' a-yapyapi matmiat di la ' hadi wawannu . Miy yat wamuehemi to ' hade .
All the people answered , May his blood be on us and on our children ! ||| Noma riy honon re rhaun pa riwra , Muolin doin nek la pena amor up mamni-a'na mamni mak kwara matmiatni de .
Then he released Barabbas to them , but Jesus he flogged and delivered to be crucified . ||| Noma Pilatus nolin doinia Barabas la pa nala la ira , ne nhopan pa riy rliwra Yesus . Na'nama nala pa rla rwairia la auwlakra hananni .
Then the governor 's soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium , and gathered the whole garrison together against him . ||| La ' noma makodi keki-rautu la ' a Pilatus genni-tienni rodia Yesus pa rler la gubernur Pilatus romni na'nama rpolg awoka makodi keki-rautu korni re lidna-lidan pa rma rpepan reria Yesus .
They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him . ||| Rte'la la Yesus naniayarni pa ro'lu dioinia , ne rohoga emeka ray-ray naniayarni plalahwa mak ungu la Yesus .
They braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head , and a reed in his right hand , and they kneeled down before him and mocked him , saying , Hail , King of the Jews ! ||| Noma rhi ' a wutu-lai ida de rnairia pu'na-kiarit ruri pa rkow nana la Yesus o'tani . Nhor nia'nama rkenia lie'ena id la limni walli malganna , na'nama rwaltiora-rwaltieman la gaini ralamni pa rahe ' i-ramalia pa rakot la riwra , Mmuormiori plalahwa Ray Yahu'du ne !
They spat on him , and took the reed and struck him on the head . ||| Honona rakrui-rakpira na'nama ra'ala lie'en de pa ra rliwar reri o'tani .
When they had mocked him , they took the robe off him , and put his clothes on him , and led him away to crucify him . ||| La'pa rahe ' i-ramalia na'nama ral doinia naniairia ungu della pa rohog owa'ana naniair wamueheni . Nhor nioma rodgiota pa rla rwairia la auwlakra .
As they came out , they found a man of Cyrene , Simon by name , and they compelled him to go with them , that he might carry his cross . ||| Makodi keki-rautu re rodgiota Yesus pa rler la talan letgara de rwatrom nana riy ida nwatiawua Kirene , nwawa Simona . Noma ha rhopan pa riy de nakwara Yesus auwlakarni .
When they came to a place called Golgotha , that is to say , The place of a skull , ||| La ' noma rte'ela gen miaka ha rweta la Golgota , nnia'eratni de , Riy Ruri-Kliaklu Genni .
they gave him sour wine to drink mixed with gall . When he had tasted it , he would not drink . ||| La ' hande noma rala atiaw mak kmermeru id mak rawniah ' a la anggur turnu pa rala Yesus Nemnia totpena mehrani nmolu . Mere la'pa Yesus Ndihmia anggur tur die , noma Nahmena Nemnia .
When they had crucified him , they divided his clothing among them , casting lots , ||| Nhor nia'nama rwairia Yesus la auwlakra hananni . Na'nama rdurmu-rhakra Yesus naniayarni de rnairia patui undi .
and they sat and watched him there . ||| Nhor nia'nama ramtatna pa ratiak reria la hande .
They set up over his head the accusation against him written , THIS IS JESUS , THE KING OF THE JEWS . ||| La Yesus o'tani wawannu de rhorat targa la auganna ida , de rakot nohora hya ' maka Yahudi o'tani-matni re rto'on reri E halli pa rhorat de riwra , Hadi de Yesus , Yahudi Rayni inhatti .
Then there were two robbers crucified with him , one on his right hand and one on the left . ||| La ' hande wali pia e rken wialia riy wor lia auwlakra yoma rrora rpera-rdaitia deulu-tatra hairi Roma . Rkenia id la Yesus walli malganna ne id la ' a Yesus walli malwiru , ne Yesus Nden la letgara .
Those who passed by blasphemed him , wagging their heads ||| Mak klola hande rdik o'tani la me rwohora-rtatra me rahe ' i-ramal lia Yesus .
and saying , You who destroy the temple and build it in three days , save yourself ! If you are the Son of God , come down from the cross ! ||| Rakot la Yesus riwra , Oi ! O ed mak kiwra kwaye'er doinia Uplerlawna roma kreini nampena Omuriria owa'ana la ' lera wotellu . La ' pa plola pa Uplerlawna A'nani O ' a de Muerun la auwlakar de hananni , ne Mulewna inonmu .
Likewise the chief priests also mocking with the scribes , the Pharisees , and the elders , said , ||| Emkade walia imama re o'tani-matni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama me riy Yahudi re in letni-am letni rapolu-raliella Yesus
He saved others , but he ca n't save himself . If he is the King of Israel , let him come down from the cross now , and we will believe in him . ||| riwra , E ' de Namori-nalewna riy meheni , mere inon wamueheni de takeni Nalewan nana . La'pa ray Israel id E ' a de tamkek teka hota Nerun la auwlakar de hananni totpena tpesiaya .
He trusts in God . Let God deliver him now , if he wants him , for he said , ‘ I am the Son of God . ' ||| Enpesiaya Uplerlawna me Niwra E ' de Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a . Ne mai pia tamkek teka hota Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna E ' me edonna ?
The robbers also who were crucified with him cast on him the same reproach . ||| Riy maroro ' a re la auwlakra re ho'mana rapolu-ralielan walia Yesus la auwlakra hananni .
Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour . ||| La lera nwawuau ro'onni jam termida wehrani woru mere la ' a noh de tetema nekpa mel'uta-maliena nodia pa lera nher miemna jam wotellu .
About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice , saying , Eli , Eli , lima sabachthani ? That is , My God , my God , why have you forsaken me ? ||| La'pa edon nhal de jama wotelu , dewade Yesus Nhaun pa Niwra , Eli , eli lama sabaktani ? Ha nnia'eratni de niwra , Uplerlawnu ne , Uplerlawnu ne nihya'pa Omuolin limmu-mpue'er rormu mai A ' u ?
Some of them who stood there , when they heard it , said , This man is calling Elijah . ||| Riy wo'ir mak erla hande e ratlin nana Yesus lirni , na'nama riwra Yesus e Npolga Elia .
Immediately one of them ran and took a sponge , filled it with vinegar , put it on a reed , and gave him a drink . ||| Noma ir mutwualli ida plet pa nawlar pia nla na'ala kuliai , na'nama nto ' a la anggur turnu mak milmilu na'nama nkenia la au tutnu pa ntania la Yesus nurnu totpena Nemnia .
The rest said , Let him be . Let 's see whether Elijah comes to save him . ||| Mere mak kden hande korni riwra , Twei pleini . Yanpa Elia nma ntulan la E ' a ?
Jesus cried again with a loud voice , and yielded up his spirit . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhaunu owa'an dewade Nwaran doinia aranni .
Behold , the veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom . The earth quaked and the rocks were split . ||| La mtatande nekpa kok lawna maka ra rahew tiarga liolgeni la ' a gen mak kmou-kwitna la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni totpa riy edon rler la rialam de , ema rlihirwah ' a la ' woru la ' heyanna pa ntut mueman la yawa . Ne noha nruru me watu lialawna mana poka-pah ' a .
The tombs were opened , and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised , ||| Hoi-kietra ratpopoini ne Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu harahu mak kmati olekwa re , de rmori owa'ana .
and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection , they entered into the holy city and appeared to many . ||| Rlergot la hoi-kietarni . Ne la ' ler maka Yesus Nmori owa'an la matmiatni de ralamni , de mak kmori owa'ana re rodi liarni la ' a Yerusalem , de Uplerlawna letni de . Ne la ' hande mana rirahu ramkek ir wali .
Now the centurion and those who were with him watching Jesus , when they saw the earthquake and the things that were done , were terrified , saying , Truly this was the Son of God ! ||| La ' ler de mak khi ' o'tani la lidna makodi keki-rautu rahu ida me mak katiak reria Yesus la hande honona rdiwra-rda'ala yoma noha nruru die nor wut nieka hare honona mak ha ramkek nana re . Noma idma nakot la ida , Hadi plola ! E ' de de , Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a .
Many women were there watching from afar , who had followed Jesus from Galilee , serving him . ||| La ' hande de patke ' rahu e ror wal pia rden nek la oliet pa e ramkek reria . Ir de ed maka klernohor reria Yesus la ' ler maka Nwatiawua Galilea pa Nmai totpena ramkek la ya'anni-yemannu , rpo ' a-rpahi ' a Yesus hyonni-hyanni .
Among them were Mary Magdalene , Mary the mother of James and Joses , and the mother of the sons of Zebedee . ||| La ' ir mutnu de , Maria Magdalena , me Maria , de Yakowsi me Yusup inni , ror wut wualia Sebedeus hawni , de Yakowsi me Yohansi inni , e rtutrieri .
When evening had come , a rich man from Arimathaea named Joseph , who himself was also Jesus ' disciple , came . ||| La ' lera ntuini de riy mak ktaru ida mak kwatiawua Arimatea nmai lia Pilatus . Nanni de Yusup . E ' mana nhi'inde nlernohor reria Yesus .
This man went to Pilate and asked for Jesus ' body . Then Pilate commanded the body to be given up . ||| Nmai pia nla nwak la Pilatus totpena na'ala Yesus inonni mak kmati olek de . Noma Pilatus nhopan pa rla rala Yesus inonni della .
Joseph took the body and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth ||| Noma Yusup nla na'ala Yesus inonni na'nama nala kok lawna warwuaru mak kamnurnuhru pa na ntomna .
and laid it in his own new tomb , which he had cut out in the rock . Then he rolled a large stone against the door of the tomb , and departed . ||| Na'nama nle'er targa la ' a liena maka na'nama Yusup ha nawte'ta nande totpa hota nmeh ' a nnairia . Mere hoi-kietar de edonna rnairi et mia'ta la ' a mati doma . Nhor nia'nama nwaklol tiarga wat liawna id pa na nherit targa lien de nhiarni pa nhor nioma nla'awa .
Mary Magdalene was there , and the other Mary , sitting opposite the tomb . ||| Maria Magdalena nora Maria id wal pia ramtatan la oliet kuku ' a la hande pa ramkek rer lia lien de .
Now on the next day , which was the day after the Preparation Day , the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered together to Pilate , ||| La'pa repra wa , de Sabat lerni noma imama re o'tani-matni me riy Parisi re , rla ' rewre'wa pa rla ' a Pilatus de .
saying , Sir , we remember what that deceiver said while he was still alive , ‘ After three days I will rise again . ' ||| Noma rakot la Pilatus riwra , Tuna , ami e mhoratreri mia'ta la ' a Yesus makalahar de Nmormiori mia'ta , de Nalahar pa Niwra la'pa lera wotellu de hota Enmori owa'ana .
Command therefore that the tomb be made secure until the third day , lest perhaps his disciples come at night and steal him away , and tell the people , ‘ He is risen from the dead , ' and the last deception will be worse than the first . ||| La ' hade pede ampak pa tuna nala mak katiaka re de ratiak toto ' memna la ' a lien de pa la'pa lera wotellu nlardoinla . Yanhi'pa la'awa lera wotellu noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rkamna ' a mak kmat die inonni , totpena riwra Enmori olekwa . Ne hota putra-palka hohoni di de narehi owa'an la mulaliaini la ' Eniwra E ' de Ray maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru inhatta .
Pilate said to them , You have a guard . Go , make it as secure as you can . ||| Noma Pilatus nakot la re , Miodia makodi keki-rautu mak katiaka . Hononmi la mitiak apitga .
So they went with the guard and made the tomb secure , sealing the stone . ||| Pede rla'awa la ' a lien de wa pa rahro'pa targa lien de nhiarni me yatiaka npitu-nkor la totpena yana riy rma ra'ala mak kmat die inonni la ' a lien de .
Now after the Sabbath , as it began to dawn on the first day of the week , Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb . ||| La'pa Sabat lerni lardoin wa dewade yawyawar ma'ta la krei lerni , la'pa lera matni npah ' a , de Maria Magdalena nora riy id wali mak kwawa Maria , rla ' pa ramkek la lien de .
Behold , there was a great earthquake , for an angel of the Lord descended from the sky and came and rolled away the stone from the door and sat on it . ||| Dewade plinu-plinnianama noha nruru upkarururu mak karur miemna . Yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni ida nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nernu . Nmai pia nwaklolia wat muaka ra rherit targa liena nhiarni de na'nama namtatn apitga la wat die wawannu .
His appearance was like lightning , and his clothing white as snow . ||| Hopopan de gaini de emeknekama tlena , me naniayarni lelera .
For fear of him , the guards shook , and became like dead men . ||| Ne makodi keki-rautu mak katiak reria lien de rdiwra-rda'al nohora yamta'atni pa nhi'nande rtuini pa emekto ' a riwra rmati .
The angel answered the women , Do n't be afraid , for I know that you seek Jesus , who has been crucified . ||| Noma Uplerlawna hopopanni de nakot la patke ' a re niwra , Yan mimta'ata . A ' g e gatga de miy mia mihaka Yesus maka ha rwairia me inonni nmat lia auwlakra hananni .
He is not here , for he has risen , just like he said . Come , see the place where the Lord was lying . ||| Hade edonna Nden olek la handi wa . Ha Nmori olekwa emeka E lirni maka Ha Nakot oleka tiy miy lia ler ululu . In miy re , mai pia mimkek tek la gen miaka ha retar targa Yesus inonni de . Mimkeka , Ha inonni edon nden olek la wa .
Go quickly and tell his disciples , ‘ He has risen from the dead , and behold , he goes before you into Galilee , there you will see him . ' Behold , I have told you . ||| Pede pena mlia ' meman wa la pa mlia mikot nohora la E mutwualli maka nhi'inde ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , miwra , Yesus Nmori olekwa . Ne hota Enala'ul miy lia Galilea totpena miora mpiatrom la hande . Hya ' a ed maka a'ukota ri , de E nnio'oni tiy miy .
They departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy , and ran to bring his disciples word . ||| Pleta-plet pa patke ' a re rto'or la hoi die pa rawal wia . Ramta'at wenna mere la ' ralamni re rahepuepru memna pa rawlar pia rla pa rakot nohora harella ' riy maka Yesus Nwatutu-nwaye ' oleka re .
As they went to tell his disciples , behold , Jesus met them , saying , Rejoice ! They came and took hold of his feet , and worshiped him . ||| Er ma'ta la talan ralma de plinu-plinnianama Yesus Nhar gaini la patke ' a re pa Niwra , Kalwieda nar miy re ! Noma rmai pia rwakriania Yesus pa rwaltiora na'nama rkolla lakni pa ruh ' idma-rrama lia'ar la .
Then Jesus said to them , Do n't be afraid . Go tell my brothers that they should go into Galilee , and there they will see me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Yan mimta'ata . Mlia pa mikot la A a'mu-hya'lu pa rla'awa la Galilea totpena twatrom la hande pa ramkek A ' u .
Now while they were going , behold , some of the guards came into the city and told the chief priests all the things that had happened . ||| La'pa patke ' a re ralala ' rer mia'ta dewade mak katiaka re doma rla rod kiot la leta la imama re o'tani-matni la ' a hya ' a maka ha ramkek oleka re .
When they were assembled with the elders and had taken counsel , they gave a large amount of silver to the soldiers , ||| Noma imam o'tani re rora riy Yahudi re in letni-am letni rna'ohma pa rala kupna riwnu-riwnu la mak katiak reria lien de .
saying , Say that his disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept . ||| Ne rano ' a re riwra , Pen mikota miwra , Maklernohor reri Yesus re rma rwuri-rgalma melmel nana Yesus inonni , yoma amanin hal ami .
If this comes to the governor 's ears , we will persuade him and make you free of worry . ||| Ne la'pa gubernur Pilatus natlin nan de pena am ma'ursia pa yana gubernur de nukum miy .
So they took the money and did as they were told . This saying was spread abroad among the Jews , and continues until today . ||| Noma mak katiak reria liena re , ra'al kupna-kai re wa ne rhi ' emeka hya ' ed maka o'ta-mata rakot la ira . Rla ' rakot nohora riwra , Maklernohora Yesusa rma rwuri-rgalum nana Yesus inonni . Ne lir de ed maka Yahudi rodi pa nwewar la noha uhunu-ewatni pa nma nte'ela ler di .
But the eleven disciples went into Galilee , to the mountain where Jesus had sent them . ||| Maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani ida re rla'awa la ' wo'ora mak kden la Galilea pa emek la ' a hya ' ed maka Yesus Nano'taru re .
When they saw him , they bowed down to him , but some doubted . ||| La'pa rwatroma Yesus la hande , noma rru ' u-rtowar pa ruh ' idma-rrama lia'ar la Yesus . Mere la ir de dom mana emeknekama edonna rpesiaya .
Jesus came to them and spoke to them , saying , All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth . ||| Noma Yesus Nwakriania na'nama Nakot la re Niwra , Plola-mneha la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha nora nohkerna de ral oleka mai A wua .
Go and make disciples of all nations , baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit , ||| La ' hade pede mlia'awa pa miodkiota-mialde'et nohor A lia noheri woru-lyanit nayanni totpena riy mak kwatiawua noha-rai honona hota rpesiaya me rlernohor reri A ' u . Mhiarania re de mpiet la Ama , A'na me Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli nanni totpena riy ratga de ha rre ' olek la A mu'tu-rah ' u .
teaching them to observe all things that I commanded you . Behold , I am with you always , even to the end of the age . Amen . ||| Mpiatutu-mpiaye ' a re pa rlernohor hya ' to ' a maka A'ukot targa tiy miy . Ne mhioratreria , hota A ' g edonna golin miy lia la'pa nodia la noha hohoni .
The beginning of the Good News of Jesus Christ , the Son of God . ||| La ' hadi de rakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni maka rakot nohora Yesus Kristus , Uplerlawna A'nani . La ' mulaliaini de Yohansi nwaga la kniari .
As it is written in the prophets , Behold , I send my messenger before your face , who will prepare your way before you , ||| Enhi ' emekto ' a hya ' ed maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya ha nhorat targ olek wa . Yoma makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya ha nhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni maka e Nakot nohora Yohansi kniarni , de Niwra , Mhioratreria ! Hadi ed maka Aghopna . Hota Aghopna hade pa nala ' ulg O ' a totpena nwahyar tialan pa Omliola .
the voice of one crying in the wilderness , ‘ Make ready the way of the Lord ! Make his paths straight ! ' ||| Hota e ' de polpuolu-hawaunia la wo'orletna-kawurloini pa niwra , Mpiahi ' targa talla la Orgahi-Orha ' a , mpiale'era loini-talanni !
John came baptizing in the wilderness and preaching the baptism of repentance for forgiveness of sins . ||| Emekto ' a hya ' a maka Yesaya nhorat targa nohora hopopna-lili'iru de , emkade pa Yohansi maka kharani riy nhar lia wo'orletna-kawurloini . Yohansi nhaun pa niwra , Hoi ! Mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi re pa mai pia rharan miy ee ! Totpena hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitan miy lia do'omi-halmi !
All the country of Judea and all those of Jerusalem went out to him . They were baptized by him in the Jordan river , confessing their sins . ||| Riy rahu rehi rwatiawua Yerusalem , me Yudea liewnu rriw niana pa rmai pia ratlin la Yohansi ha nakotkota . Noka ir rakota plele'er momuoga do'oni-halli re , ne Yohansi nharania re la ' gerlawna Yordan .
John was clothed with camel 's hair and a leather belt around his waist . He ate locusts and wild honey . ||| Yohansi naniayarni de ra ' nana la onta wullu me rewni de ra ' nana la ha ulti me ya'anni-yemannu de kongoha nora gani turnu .
He preached , saying , After me comes he who is mightier than I , the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and loosen . ||| Lir di de Yohansi ed maka nakot niwra , Hota Riy id mak kreh nian a ' u Nmai pia klernohor a ' di . Hota awue'er doin lakni wniowni ho'mana a ' g edonna puar nana .
I baptized you in water , but he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit . ||| A ' di agala gera ga gharani miy mere hota riy mak kmai die , Nala Uplerlawna Nhiwni tiy miy .
In those days , Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee , and was baptized by John in the Jordan . ||| Ler maka Yohansi nharanania riy de , Yesus Nmai de Nwatiawua Nasaret la Galilea . Nmai noka Yohansi nharani Yesus la gerlawna Yordan ralamni .
Immediately coming up from the water , he saw the heavens parting and the Spirit descending on him like a dove . ||| La'pa rharania la gera ralamni pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nrei lia gera aratni emkadi de , plin-plinnianama Namkeka lyanti nahniarti ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nerun de emolmolla ma'nu lmo'ma maru merpati pa ntai lia wawannu .
A voice came out of the sky , You are my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased . ||| Noma ratlin de Uplerlawna Nhar lirni la ' a lyanti Niwra , O ' de A A'nu mak Asiayni inhatti . O ' ed maka kla ' nana A ralmu .
Immediately the Spirit drove him out into the wilderness . ||| Nhor nioma Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodia Yesus pa Nla'awa wo'orletna-kawurloini .
He was there in the wilderness forty days , tempted by Satan . He was with the wild animals , and the angels were serving him . ||| La wo'orletna-kawurloini de Yesus Nor wutga pora-dawra , ne hegana amlawanni nta ' niana la lera-mela terampwogata . Mere Uplerlawna hopopanni re rma ramkek la E ' a .
Now after John was taken into custody , Jesus came into Galilee , preaching the Good News of God 's Kingdom , ||| La'pa rtoran nana Yohanis wa pa rkenia la roma nhio'la ralamni dewade Yesus Nla'awa la Galilea lowanni pa Nakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni .
and saying , The time is fulfilled , and God 's Kingdom is at hand ! Repent , and believe in the Good News . ||| Niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , lerni ntu'tu olekwa di ! Ntutu-nte ' olek pa hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la riy emeka ir Rayni . Pede mhioitio'or doini-mtiahnei dioini do'omi-halmi ne , mpiesiaya Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni .
Passing along by the sea of Galilee , he saw Simon and Andrew , the brother of Simon , casting a net into the sea , for they were fishermen . ||| La'pa lera ida ne Yesus Nala ' lola danau aratni la Galilea dewade Namkek nana Simon nor hyalli Andarias ratialtial reria i'na la ' a danau de , yoma hare kniarni hade .
Jesus said to them , Come after me , and I will make you into fishers for men . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Ee , ma mliernohor A ' g ee ! Mai pia Awuatut miy totpena la ' emkameni la miy mitial reri i'na la dodo'ondi , de hota emkade wal pia mihak rimormiori totpena hota rpesiay mai A ' u .
Immediately they left their nets , and followed him . ||| Noma rleretniekla rteman taru tialli , ne rlernohora Yesus .
Going on a little further from there , he saw James the son of Zebedee , and John his brother , who were also in the boat mending the nets . ||| Yesus Nodi liarni noma Namkek nana riy id nanni Yakowsi nor hyalli Yohansi e rwalola tiala la puounu ralamni .
Immediately he called them , and they left their father , Zebedee , in the boat with the hired servants , and went after him . ||| Plet pa Yesus Npolga re Niwra , Mmiai ee ! Noma raltarga amni Sebedeus la puounu ralamni na'itar wutu Sebedeus hopopanni-lili'irnu re , ne irrora rla rlernohora Yesus lidanni de .
They went into Capernaum , and immediately on the Sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and taught . ||| Nhor nioma rla'awa la leta Kapernaum . La'pa Sabat lerni , maka Yahudi re edonna rkar lia , ntutu-nte'ewa , dewade Yesus Nla'awa la gen miaka Yahudi nhi'inde rhi ' kreini-iskolli pa Nwatut lia hande .
They were astonished at his teaching , for he taught them as having authority , and not as the scribes . ||| Riy rwer rer wiawni la wniatutnu-wniaye'eni de , yoma Nodi plolli wibawa pa Nwatutu . Pede wniatutnu de ematia ' a makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama Yahudi wniatutnu .
Immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit , and he cried out , ||| La ' a gen miaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli la , de riy ida maka hegana nhu'ru ralma . Nhaunu-nhaunu pa niwra ,
saying , Ha ! What do we have to do with you , Jesus , you Nazarene ? Have you come to destroy us ? I know who you are , the Holy One of God ! ||| Yesus Nasartu ne ! Hota Omhi ' nan emkameni mai ami oo ! Ommuai pia mpieyat ami ? A ' g e gat niohora he ' O ' a ! O ' di de maran yamou-wuhur yatoha yang suci maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana pa Nhopan pa Ommuai lia nohkerna wawannu !
Jesus rebuked him , saying , Be quiet , and come out of him ! ||| Dewade Yesus Nkamota Niwra , Rhodal nurmu ! Rhokargo'tu la ' a riy di !
The unclean spirit , convulsing him and crying with a loud voice , came out of him . ||| Noma yatni-rha'ani de nkahyoi-nkada'al meman neka riy de , na'nama nhaun matmiati dewade nhargot meman la ralamni .
They were all amazed , so that they questioned among themselves , saying , What is this ? A new teaching ? For with authority he commands even the unclean spirits , and they obey him ! ||| Riy honona rwer rer wiawni pa idma nakot la ida riwra , Wniatut warwuaru hya ' a eda dina ? Naltier die Nodi plolli-ntaryatnu pa Nwatutu . Ne la'pa Nhokargota hegana-kawnu , yatni-rha'ani mana , ratlina-ratailla pa rlergota !
The report of him went out immediately everywhere into all the region of Galilee and its surrounding area . ||| La ' hade pede pleta-plet pa Yesus kotni-nanni ema reyapie'era la Galilea uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani .
Immediately , when they had come out of the synagogue , they came into the house of Simon and Andrew , with James and John . ||| La'pa rhoitio'or la gen id maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli de , noma Yesus Nora Yakowsi me Yohansi rodi liarni la Simon nora Andarias likatni .
Now Simon 's wife 's mother lay sick with a fever , and immediately they told him about her . ||| La ' de Simon yananni entepartarlia yanina yoma temni npahna , noma rakot nohora patke ' de mehrani la Yesus .
He came and took her by the hand and raised her up . The fever left her immediately , and she served them . ||| Pede Yesus Nla Nwakriania patke ' de yanin genni , na'nama Nte'la la patke ' de limni pa Nwagamata , dewade nnienni de nmolu . Noma nla nwahi ' a-nwayodia ya'ana-yemun pa honona ra'ana-remnia .
At evening , when the sun had set , they brought to him all who were sick and those who were possessed by demons . ||| La'pa lera ntuinia , dewade rodia riy honona mak kamehra me maka hegana ha nhu'ru ralma pa rla'awa Yesus .
All the city was gathered together at the door . ||| Rirahu re rmai lia likit de pa rawok la nhiari gaini .
He healed many who were sick with various diseases and cast out many demons . He did n't allow the demons to speak , because they knew him . ||| Noma Yesus Nhi ' a riy harahu pa rkalwied la nnieni-nhiena , mehra-mau , me Nhokar dodioinia hegana-kawnu , yatni-rha'ani liawanni . Edon Nhur niohora hegana-kawnu re pa raltieri yoma rat niohora de Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa E inhatta .
Early in the morning , while it was still dark , he rose up and went out , and departed into a deserted place , and prayed there . ||| Repreparrer mia'ta , mela loka-lak ma'ta de , Yesus Namat pa Nla'awa tio'ora . Nla'awa la geni maka hgali , la ' a leta to'orni na'nama Nsumbain la hande .
Simon and those who were with him searched for him . ||| Mere Simon nora talanwalli rla rwahaka .
They found him and told him , Everyone is looking for you . ||| La'pa rwatrom nana dewade rakot la riwra , Rirahu e rahak O ' a .
He said to them , Let 's go elsewhere into the next towns , that I may preach there also , because I came out for this reason . ||| Yesus Nwahla re Niwra , Mai pia tokur geni dom to ' a , tla ' a let mak rehgorgoru re , totpena la ' hande mana A'ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni yala'ani , yoma maka katota-kariei pede Amuai olekwa di , de A'ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota della leta honona re .
He went into their synagogues throughout all Galilee , preaching and casting out demons . ||| Noma la'pa Nala ' doinia Galilea uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani , me Nakot nohora Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni-paitiotni la roma-lewu maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli , ne Nhokar dodioinia hegana-kawnu mak khu'ru ralma riy .
A leper came to him , begging him , kneeling down to him , and saying to him , If you want to , you can make me clean . ||| Lera ida ne riy mak kanieni ulityata-temyata nmai noma nwaltior tar lia Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama nwak la niwra , Amee ! Mtiulan mai a ' u . Agat niohora de Omuodi plolli pa Mhi ' kalwied nan a ' u , hornama Ompuayow nohora a wakwa'ku di .
Being moved with compassion , he stretched out his hand , and touched him , and said to him , I want to . Be made clean . ||| Yesus Nsaynia riy de pede Nran limni pa Nteman la riy de pa Nakot la , Arieiniana o wakwakmu pa omkialwied wa !
When he had said this , immediately the leprosy departed from him and he was made clean . ||| Mtatan de nekpa nnienni de nmolu .
He strictly warned him and immediately sent him out , ||| Noka pleta-plet pa Nhopna riy de nla'awa ne Nano ' matmiat memna riy de
and said to him , See that you say nothing to anybody , but go show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing the things which Moses commanded , for a testimony to them . ||| Niwra , Hyalia , mhuoratreria ! Yana mukot harilla ' riy dom owa'ana . Mere mliernohora hya ' maka Musa ne'era-ntatar targ oleka , de mlia ' a imam ida pa mpuak la totpena namkek memna de omkialwied olekwa . Me muala limtutnu emeka Musa ha nwatut tiarg oleka de totpa riy honona rat niohora de omkialwied olek wa .
But he went out , and began to proclaim it much , and to spread about the matter , so that Jesus could no more openly enter into a city , but was outside in desert places . People came to him from everywhere . ||| Mere riy de nla'awa la'pa nwe'era Yesus hihi'ini de la he ' a-he ' a to ' a . Hade ed mak karei pia Yesus ta'en niana Nhari wawah ' a la leta-ruhuna re ralamni . Ndella leta to'orni , la ' a gen miaka hgali . Mere riy rwatiawua meni-meni to ' pa rma rapur temna .
When he entered again into Capernaum after some days , it was heard that he was at home . ||| La'pa lera woru-wotelu rlardoinla dewade Yesus Nmai owa'an la leta Kapernaum , noma rod kiota-ral de'eta de E ' etla roma nayanni .
Immediately many were gathered together , so that there was no more room , not even around the door , and he spoke the word to them . ||| Noma riy rahu rma rawok la hande pa reiniande geni hamonna , la ' a nhiari gaini ho'mana geni npenu . Dewade Yesus Nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la rirahu re .
Four people came , carrying a paralytic to him . ||| Noma riy doma rmai die e rodia mak kaliu'uta id la E ' a , de riy wogata rhim nana .
When they could not come near to him for the crowd , they removed the roof where he was . When they had broken it up , they let down the mat that the paralytic was lying on . ||| Mere la ' ler de de riy rahu rehia , pede edonna rlernan talan pa rodia la ' a rialma . Noka rwaye'er doinia roma ritni mak kden la Yesus o'tani wawannu , nhorwua dewade ralernu mak kaliu'uta de na'itar neka u'tani maka enanin la wawannu .
Jesus , seeing their faith , said to the paralytic , Son , your sins are forgiven you . ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek tutga riy mak kmai re pesiayni raruri , noma Yesus Nakot la riy mak kaliu'uta de Niwra , Ama , dodo'ondi de A'umou-uwitn oleka do'omu-halmu .
But there were some of the scribes sitting there and reasoning in their hearts , ||| Dewade makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama mak kamtatna la hande rwarora-rwalai la ralamni riwra ,
Why does this man speak blasphemies like that ? Who can forgive sins but God alone ? ||| Nihya'pa riy di Naltieri emkadena ? Enapolu-naliella Uplerlawna ! Yoma atiaru Uplerlawna nanpena Namou-nawitna rira do'oni-halli .
Immediately Jesus , perceiving in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves , said to them , Why do you reason these things in your hearts ? ||| La ' ler de meman pa ira ralma-riorni re , Yesus Nat niohora momuoga , pede Nakot la , Ee , hya ' ed mak kariei pia mimpiaror nana yatiana rena ? !
Which is easier , to tell the paralytic , ‘ Your sins are forgiven , ' or to say , ‘ Arise , and take up your bed , and walk ' ? ||| La'pa plet pa A'ukot nek la mak kaliu'uta di giwra e do'oni-halli ramou-rawitn oleka de , miplin niohor ma'ta plollola pa e do'oni-halli ramou-rawitn oleka me edonna , mere la'pa Apuaran pia A'ukot la e ' pa namat pa npopna u'tani pa nala'awa de mimiat niohor memna A ru'ru-la'yu etla yoma mimkek nan memna .
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins-he said to the paralytic- ||| Pede hota la ' dodo'ondi de Agiwra tiut muemna tiy miy , la ' a noh di wawannu , de Rimormiori A'nani A ' g ed mak kodi plolli pa umou-uwitna riy do'oni-halli . Noma Yesus Nakot la mak kaliu'ut de
I tell you , arise , take up your mat , and go to your house . ||| Niwra , Hyalia , mumat doin la pa mpuopna u'tamu de pa mlia'awa rommu .
He arose , and immediately took up the mat and went out in front of them all , so that they were all amazed and glorified God , saying , We never saw anything like this ! ||| Dewade mak kaliu'ut de namat doin na'nama npopna u'tani pa nla'awa la ' a hare gaini ralamni . Riy honona la hande mana rwer rer wiawni , ne ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna . Rwer rer wiawni pia riwra , It edonna tamkek ma'ta hihi ' a-yapyapi maka itamkeka la ' ler di !
He went out again by the seaside . All the multitude came to him , and he taught them . ||| Noma Yesus Nla ' owa'an la danau aratni , ne riy harahu rmai tiemna dewade Nwatutga re .
As he passed by , he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office . He said to him , Follow me . And he arose and followed him . ||| La'pa Yesus Nalala ' rer mia'ta noma Namkek nana mak kawoka blastena id de nanni Lewi , Alpius a'nani . La ' ler de de Lewi e namtatna la gen miaka nhi'inde enawoka blasten la . Noma Yesus Npol lia , E ! Mua mliernohor A ' g ee ! Noma Lewi naprir pia nlernohora Yesus .
He was reclining at the table in his house , and many tax collectors and sinners sat down with Jesus and his disciples , for there were many , and they followed him . ||| La'pa Yesus e Nana'an rer lia Lewi romni dewade riy harahu maka nhi'inde leta mniotni sukni atia'ala re , emeka mak kawoka blastena me riy mak ha riwra riy dodo ' a-halala rmai pia rora Yesus me maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa ra'an rewre'wa , yoma riy harahu mak emkare nhi'inde rlernohor reri Yesus .
The scribes and the Pharisees , when they saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors , said to his disciples , Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners ? ||| Riy Parisi dom makla ' walia makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ramkek wali hare . Noma ratiana riy maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riwra , Oi ! Nihya'pa miy tungkurmi de Nora mak kawoka blastena , ror wutga riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala dom to ' pa re ra'an wutu ? !
When Jesus heard it , he said to them , Those who are healthy have no need for a physician , but those who are sick . I came not to call the righteous , but sinners to repentance . ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin nana yatianni re noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mak edonna kanieni edonna rma rahaka dokter . Eneknek to ' a makamehra nanpena ed mak kwahaka dokter . Amuai die A ' g edonna mua puolga riy mak kiwra irakleha do ' a-hala , mere Amuai di totpa Apuolga riy dodo ' a-halala pa rhoitio'or doini do'oni-halli re .
John 's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting , and they came and asked him , Why do John 's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast , but your disciples do n't fast ? ||| Ler ida ne , maklernohora Yohansi makharani rora Parisi mniotni ratatahan reri lara , ne riy rmai pia ratiana Yesus riwra , Nihya'pa maklernohora Yohansi re rora riy Parisi ratahan lara , ne maklernohor reri O ' a de ra'ana ?
Jesus said to them , Can the groomsmen fast while the bridegroom is with them ? As long as they have the bridegroom with them , they ca n't fast . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Emkameni la miy wniarormi dena de ? ! A ' di de emeknekama muanke ' a mak kiwra kmehlima . Riy maka rpol niana-rwak nana pa ra'ana-remun la yawoka-yale ' u la mehlima-marya ' a , de hota edonna ratahan lara la'pa muanke ' a muaka kmehlima ntepartar mua't la ya'ana la ' mei wawannu toh ? ! Hade yala'ani atia ' hade !
But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them , and then they will fast in that day . ||| Mere hota la'pa nte'ela la ' lerni , nanpena ira'ala muanke ' a muaka kmehlim della mak ka'an wutu re onni . La ' ler de nampena iratahan lara .
No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment , or else the patch shrinks and the new tears away from the old , and a worse hole is made . ||| Riy edonna rga ' pua rala kokanan warwuaru ra rlowna rain mak kawniali . Yoma la'pa emkade de kokanan warwuar die hota napliu'uta-napdiedan nana rain mak kawnial de ne hota na'itar la pritni .
No one puts new wine into old wineskins , or else the new wine will burst the skins , and the wine pours out , and the skins will be destroyed , but they put new wine into fresh wineskins . ||| Emkade wal lia riy edonna rga ' pua rhuria anggur tur warwuarnu la ' a ha ulit mak mahnek oleka . Yoma anggur tur warwuarnu de hota nhi ' nana ha ulit mahnek de ema reye'era pa anggur tur de rhur dioinia ne ha ulit de ho'mana ta'en niana rnair owa'ana . Anggur tur warwuaru de rhuria la ha ulit warwuaru .
He was going on the Sabbath day through the grain fields , and his disciples began , as they went , to pluck the ears of grain . ||| La lera id la ' Sabat lerni , de Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rala ' a la nhyi ' wetra ' lawna ida ralamni , ne maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rkura wetra ' lawna re harni pa ra'ana .
The Pharisees said to him , Behold , why do they do that which is not lawful on the Sabbath day ? ||| Noma riy Parisi rakot la Yesus riwra , Mumkek la me ! Nihya'pa maka Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a re rpera-rdaitia it agamni deullu-tatarni yoma ir e rkar lia ' a Sabat lerni ? !
He said to them , Did you never read what David did when he had need and was hungry-he , and those who were with him ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Miy mpiaik nan olek la ' a hya ' maka Daud nhi ' a la ' lera e nora talanwalli re raplara mere rakleha yamanna toh !
How he entered into God 's house at the time of Abiathar the high priest , and ate the show bread , which is not lawful to eat except for the priests , and gave also to those who were with him ? ||| La ' ler maka Abiatar nhi ' imam o'ta lawanni , de Daud nler la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni na'nama na'ana rot miaka ha ral oleka la Uplerlawna . Nhor nia'nama nal walia roti rella ' mutu korni pa ra'an wal lia . Mere la'pa deulu-tatra agama , de mak ka'ana roti re de eneknek to ' a imam-imam rmeh ' a .
He said to them , The Sabbath was made for man , not man for the Sabbath . ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' a Sabat lerni totpa Ntulan la rimormiori . E ' edonna Nhi ' a Sabat de emeka ler mak kla kwar lawna la rimormiori wawannu .
Therefore the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath . ||| La hade pede Rimormiori A'nani A ' die mana , A ' g ed mak kodi plolli pa A'ukot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplola onde nhala pa itsi ' a la Sabat lerni .
He entered again into the synagogue , and there was a man there whose hand was withered . ||| La lera id de Yesus Nla owa'an la gen miaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli . La ' noma Namkek nana riy ida etla hande de limni walli nmati .
They watched him , whether he would heal him on the Sabbath day , that they might accuse him . ||| La hande de riy doma riwra rahaka kahelli-kaha'arni la ' Yesus totpena Nhi ' de rodia la letgara lawawna hakim . Pede honona rkil rer lia hota Nhi ' kalwieda makamehra-kamau la Sabat lerni me edonna ?
He said to the man whose hand was withered , Stand up . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la riy maka limni walli kmat die Niwra , Mai pia mtiutrier lia riy honona gaini ralamni .
He said to them , Is it lawful on the Sabbath day to do good or to do harm ? To save a life or to kill ? But they were silent . ||| Nhor nia'nama Yesus Natiana riy mak kden la ' hande niwra , La ' a agama deullu-tatarni de rakot targa hota it tsi ' a hya ' a la Sabat lerni ? Hota it tsi ' a samomuounu me onde tsi ' a yatyatni ? Tamori-talewna rimormior me onde twaror nohora wniunu-wnienna la it rimormior wialli ? Mere ir rherier tio'owa .
When he had looked around at them with anger , being grieved at the hardening of their hearts , he said to the man , Stretch out your hand . He stretched it out , and his hand was restored as healthy as the other . ||| Yesus ralamni nmawal doin la onnila hare o'ta watu , noma nod niek ralmha'arni pa Namkek la riy nenenan gaini na'nama Nakot la riy de Niwra , Mpuetar limmu ! Noma riy de nwetar limni de mtatande nekpa nnienni nmolu .
The Pharisees went out , and immediately conspired with the Herodians against him , how they might destroy him . ||| Nhor nioka riy Parisi re rhoitio'or la gen miaka Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli de wa , na'nama ror wut nieka Herodes mniotni rna'ohma pa rwenna Yesus .
Jesus withdrew to the sea with his disciples , and a great multitude followed him from Galilee , from Judea , from Jerusalem , from Idumaea , beyond the Jordan , and those from around Tyre and Sidon . A great multitude , hearing what great things he did , came to him . ||| Noma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwadur la danau aratni , mere mak kdena Galilea harahu rma rlernohora re , ra'itar mak kdena letlawna Yerusalem ror wutga Yudea korni re wali , makden Idumea , makden Yordan walli , me mak kwatiawu Tirus me Sidon . Honona re rmai tiemna yoma ratlin nan oleka hya'-hya ' maka Yesus Nhi ' nana .
He spoke to his disciples that a little boat should stay near him because of the crowd , so that they would n't press on him . ||| Noka Nhopan maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwahi ' a puou id la , yoma riy rahu re nhi'pa rma rhopun E ' a .
For he had healed many , so that as many as had diseases pressed on him that they might touch him . ||| Yoma Nhi ' riy rahu pa rkalwieda , reiniande makamehra-kamau honona rma rwayotli-rwadahla la onni pa riwra rho ' a-rhaiya Yesus totpa ir inonni meheni rkalwied walia .
The unclean spirits , whenever they saw him , fell down before him and cried , You are the Son of God ! ||| Riy maka hegana nhu'ru ralma ramkek nan Yesus , dewade rma rwaltiora-rwaltieman la gaini ralamni na'nama hegana re rhaun matmiati , O ' de Uplerlawna A'nani inhat O ' a !
He sternly warned them that they should not make him known . ||| Mere Nano ' matmiati pia yan memmemna rakot nohora he ' E ' a .
He went up into the mountain and called to himself those whom he wanted , and they went to him . ||| Lera ida Yesus Nafia'at la wo'ora id hananni , noka Npolg awoka riy maka Eniwa Nhi ' a la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re .
He appointed twelve , that they might be with him , and that he might send them out to preach ||| Nwaliri-nwalioh nan walia riy termida wehrani woru la ' hare honona . Noma Npolga hare la Mak Ha Nwalir niana pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Yesus Nakot la , Awualiri miy totpena Alia ' meni-meni to ' de miy miora A ' tialla , totpena Aghopna mlia mikot nohora Uplerlawna lirni
and to have authority to heal sicknesses and to cast out demons , ||| ne Agala A ru'ru-la'yu totpena miy mhiokargota hegana-kawnu .
Simon to whom he gave the name Peter , ||| Riy mak termida wehrani woru ri nanni , Simon mak Yesus Nal walia nani Petrus ,
James the son of Zebedee , and John , the brother of James , whom he called Boanerges , which means , Sons of Thunder , ||| Sebedeus a'nani Yakowsi nora hyalli Yohansi mak Yesus Nala nanni Boanerges maka nnia'eratni de kukru-gauru a'nani ,
Andrew , Philip , Bartholomew , Matthew , Thomas , James , the son of Alphaeus , Thaddaeus , Simon the Zealot , ||| Andarias , Pilipsu , Bartolomeus , Matius , Tomsa , Yakowsi , de Alpius a'nani , Tadeus , Simon maka ha rweta la riy mak kwayotil memna hairi Romawi rodi plolli la Israel ,
and Judas Iscariot , who also betrayed him . Then he came into a house . ||| la'pa Yudas Iskariot maka na'olga Yesus .
The multitude came together again , so that they could not so much as eat bread . ||| Nhor nioka Yesus Nla'awa roma id ralamni . Noma riy rahu rma rhopun temna , nhi'nande Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re edon ra'an eti .
When his friends heard it , they went out to seize him , for they said , He is insane . ||| La'pa luwnu-a'nani ratlin nana Yesus edade , noka rmai pia riwra ra'ala , yoma riy rakota riwra , O'tani leplep olekwa .
The scribes who came down from Jerusalem said , He has Beelzebul , and , By the prince of the demons he casts out the demons . ||| Makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama mak kwatiawua Yerusalem riwra , Riy di , Be'elsebul nhu'ru ralma . Enhokar doin hegana-kawnu rella yoma Be'elsebul , hegana amlawanni de ed mak kala ruri-lai la E ' a .
He summoned them and said to them in parables , How can Satan cast out Satan ? ||| Yesus Npolg awoka re na'nama Nnairia yawalliohora pa Nakot la re , Hegana woka-le ' u ida edon nhokra hegana woka-le ' u dom to ' a toh ? !
If a kingdom is divided against itself , that kingdom can not stand . ||| Hegana re emeknekama hairi ida . La'pa la hair ida rimormiorni ema rhakre'era la wokni-wokni mak kahuri-kawo'ora , de hota hair de edonna namteman plalahwa .
If a house is divided against itself , that house can not stand . ||| Me luwu-a'na ida nden rer lia yahuri-yawo'ora de hota rweyata-rwaniawua luwu-a'na de .
If Satan has risen up against himself , and is divided , he ca n't stand , but has an end . ||| Emkade walia la hegana amlawanni tnioranni-riautnu . La'pa hegana woka-le ' u ida , nhokra hegana woka-le ' u dom to ' a , de hota hegana tnioranni-riautnu ema reyapie'era ne nanewar doin la , pa hota edon nodi plolli owa'an wa .
But no one can enter into the house of the strong man to plunder unless he first binds the strong man , then he will plunder his house . ||| Itala mak karuri-kalai ida pa itsi ' la yawalliohora . De la'pa riy riwra reyahru mak karuri-kalai ida re'eni-tniarnu , pa'etnu de nwutu-nkohg ulga mak karuri-kalai die nanpena nler la mak karuri-kalai die romni ralamni pa na'ala hade re'eni-tniarnu . Hade emekwali Aghi ' a la hegana amlawanni .
Most certainly I tell you , all sins of the descendants of man will be forgiven , including their blasphemies with which they may blaspheme , ||| Mitlina , A'ukot hadi totpa mhioratreria , de la'pa riy rhi ' a do ' a-hala me napolu-naliella Uplerlawna , de hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli re .
but whoever may blaspheme against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness , but is subject to eternal condemnation . ||| Mere la'pa riy meni ed mak kapolu-kaliella Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , de riy de , hota Uplerlawna edon Namou-nawitan la do'oni-halli de , mere rwaghala onnila nhi ' do ' a-nyap hial maka kodi liarni .
-because they said , He has an unclean spirit . ||| Yesus Nakot emkade yoma rakot olekwa riwra , Yesus de , hegana nhu'ru ralam nana .
His mother and his brothers came , and standing outside , they sent to him , calling him . ||| Noka Yesus inni me a'nani korni rmai wia . E rtutrier mia'ta la tio'or wa dewade , rhopna riy rla rpolu Yesus .
A multitude was sitting around him , and they told him , Behold , your mother , your brothers , and your sisters are outside looking for you . ||| Rirahu e ramtatna pa rpepan reria Yesus , noma rakot la , Tuna , Tuna inni nora amni-hyalli e rtutrier lia tio'ora , rwahak talan pa rwatro'mu .
He answered them , Who are my mother and my brothers ? ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora pa Nakot nohor pleini , Niwra , A i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu la Uplerlawna yamkekni de he ' a ?
Looking around at those who sat around him , he said , Behold , my mother and my brothers ! ||| Namkek la riy mak kamtatna pa kpepan reria re , noma Nakot la ira , Hari , er maka a i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu .
For whoever does the will of God is my brother , my sister , and mother . ||| Riy maka khi ' nana Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , de hare er mak kla ' A i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu .
Again he began to teach by the seaside . A great multitude was gathered to him , so that he entered into a boat in the sea and sat down . All the multitude were on the land by the sea . ||| Noma Yesus la Nwatut owa'an la danau aratni . Riy harahu rwayotil pa rma rpepan nana Yesus , pa narieiniande Yesus Nwatitin genni la puou mak kapniali id wawannu pa Namtatna la ' hande . Ne riy rariahu re rtutrier lia eni wawannu .
He taught them many things in parables , and told them in his teaching , ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora pa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a la ' a lira nnio ' a-niatu harahu la ' a riy rariahu re . La ' wniatutnu de ralamni E Niwra ,
Listen ! Behold , the farmer went out to sow . ||| Mitlina ! Mak kanhyi ' a-katlunni ida nla ' pa nrinnia winni-hgonni la nhyi'ini .
As he sowed , some seed fell by the road , and the birds came and devoured it . ||| La'pa nrinnia wini-hgona re dom de rtuin la talla ralamni , noma onu-ma'nu rmai pia rtotan nan momuoga .
Others fell on the rocky ground , where it had little soil , and immediately it sprang up , because it had no depth of soil . ||| Dom de rtuin la watgau ralamni pa ntai tani oke ' to ' a . Plet pa nmor wia yoma tani mniha .
When the sun had risen , it was scorched , and because it had no root , it withered away . ||| Mere la'pa lera nhit wa dewade rmakulli-rmarella pa rmat wia yoma ga'arni edonna nlera plollola tani ralamni .
Others fell among the thorns , and the thorns grew up and choked it , and it yielded no fruit . ||| Wini-hgon de , dom de rtuin la pu'na-kiarti pa nhi'nande ruwnu-ahla rururni-karkiaratni re rmor pia ratolaw wenwenna pede ta'en niana ha rmori plollola pede rakleh wo ' a .
Others fell into the good ground and yielded fruit , growing up and increasing . Some produced thirty times , some sixty times , and some one hundred times as much . ||| Mere dom pal die rtuin la tan ihi wawannu pa rmori samomuou . Rpoti-rkaduw pede dom de ra'unu-rayeh nohora wo'oni terampwotelu , me dom pal die terampwonema . Ne la dom pal owa'an de rawo ' nana rahg ida .
He said , Whoever has ears to hear , let him hear . ||| La'pa miy tlinmi erla de , mitlin reri !
When he was alone , those who were around him with the twelve asked him about the parables . ||| La'pa Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re termida wehrani woru ror wutga maklernohor reri E ' a riy dom to ' a rmeh ' a taru , dewade ratian nohor E ' a la ' a yawalliohor re .
He said to them , To you is given the mystery of God 's Kingdom , but to those who are outside , all things are done in parables , ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Uplerlawna Nhu'ula tlinmi-nwe'er matmi totpena miat niohora la hya ' ed maka riy raplin niohor ma'ta la ' a Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu . Mere eneknek to ' a rala yawalliohora re rwatutga riy mak kakleha pesiay .
that ‘ seeing they may see and not perceive , and hearing they may hear and not understand , lest perhaps they should turn again , and their sins should be forgiven them . ' ||| Totpa , Hota ramkek reria mere emkade ho'mana edonna rna'erit nana . Ira e ratlin reria mere emkade ho'mana raplinu-raplo ' nohora totpa yana rwaldioinia pa Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli .
He said to them , Do n't you understand this parable ? How will you understand all of the parables ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Edonna mnia'erit nana lira yawalliohor dina ? ! La'pa miy edonna mnia'erit nana de hota emkameni pede miy mnia'erit nana lira yawalliohora re korni ? !
The farmer sows the word . ||| Mak ke'er wini-hgona re emeknekama riy mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni .
The ones by the road are the ones where the word is sown , and when they have heard , immediately Satan comes and takes away the word which has been sown in them . ||| Wini-hgona mak ktuin la talla ralamni de emeknekama riy maka katlin oleka Uplerlawna lirni na'nama hegana amlawanni nmai pia nwarui-nwate'la nana lira-tun diella mak katlin oleka re .
These in the same way are those who are sown on the rocky places , who , when they have heard the word , immediately receive it with joy . ||| Wini-hgon maka ktuin la watwuatnu nnia'eratni de riy dom maka katlin nana lir kalwied de dewade rleretniekla ralamni naplele'er pa rreiniana .
They have no root in themselves , but are short-lived . When oppression or persecution arises because of the word , immediately they stumble . ||| Mere lir kalwied de edonna naga'ar la ' a ir ihranu ralamni pede nhi'nande edon nalo'on wali ne nwal lia hamamuamua . La'pa rler la kropanni-krieutnu , onde yamuki-yama'ala yoma la ' a lir de rerieini , dewade rleretniekla rwadur la pesiayni .
Others are those who are sown among the thorns . These are those who have heard the word , ||| Wini-hgon maka ktuin la ruwnu-ahla pu'na-kiarti , de emeknekama riy dom maka katlin nana lir kalwied de ,
and the cares of this age , and the deceitfulness of riches , and the lusts of other things entering in choke the word , and it becomes unfruitful . ||| noma nohkerkerna rororni-lailiaini , hihi'ini-yapyapni me re ' a-tniaru tototni-wudwiudni la'pa ralam mak kod rier lia hihi ' a-yapyapi korni nmai pia nutni-ndahla lira di , de nhi'nande nakleh wo ' a .
Those which were sown on the good ground are those who hear the word , accept it , and bear fruit , some thirty times , some sixty times , and some one hundred times . ||| Ne la'pa wini-hgon maka ktuin la tan ihi , de emeknekama riy dom maka katlin nana lir de noma rreiniana pa rlernohor reri , pede mormiorni re rdella plol wawna . Riy mak katlin dom de emeknekama wini-hgon mak kawo ' a liawanni pa wo'oni nlernana nti'il nana ralamni re'eni terampwotelu , dom pal die terampwonema , ne la ' wal diom de rahu ida .
He said to them , Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket or under a bed ? Is n't it put on a stand ? ||| Noka Yesus Nakot la re , Riy edonna raltarga ktopra ra rtutwua wa'du mormiori , onde rwatatga wa'du della ' lewnu nayanni . Wa'du de rkeni hadella la ' a wniatatgenni .
For there is nothing hidden except that it should be made known , neither was anything made secret but that it should come to light . ||| Emkade wal lia ' Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , yoma E lirni mak kayade ' a honona re mana hota rakot nohora , me mak kayawunmu momuou hota nawnie'era ne rat niohor memna .
If any man has ears to hear , let him hear . ||| He ' a tlinni erla de totpa ratlina !
He said to them , Take heed what you hear . With whatever measure you measure , it will be measured to you , and more will be given to you who hear . ||| Mpiahniorat la hya ' maka A'ukota ri , yoma la riy mak klernohora hya ' maka enatlina de , hota ra'itr owa'an la wniarorni-wnialaini .
For whoever has , to him more will be given , and he who does n't have , even that which he has will be taken away from him . ||| Riy mak kiwra kna'erit nana , de hota ra'itr owa'an la wniarorni-wnialaini mere la'pa riy mak kahmena kat niohora Uplerlawna lirni , de hya ' mak enatg oleka de hota Uplerlawna Na ' owa'ana .
He said , God 's Kingdom is as if a man should cast seed on the earth , ||| Noka Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa Uplerlawna Ntorna-nrautu de emekwalima yawalliohora di . De la ' mak kanhyi ' ida , ne'era winni-hgonni la tani ralamni .
and should sleep and rise night and day , and the seed should spring up and grow , though he does n't know how . ||| Noma nmela de nanina me , leler demade namata , ne winni-hgonni re rmor pia ral uhwu , ral uhwanu pa ratultul liola , riy de naplin niohora liawanni re .
For the earth bears fruit by itself , first the blade , then the ear , then the full grain in the ear . ||| Nohkerkeran di mana nmeh ' a nekpa nal wo'oni , nhiwni ulu , noka wo'oni , nhor demade o'olli mak kden la harni ralamni .
But when the fruit is ripe , immediately he puts in the sickle , because the harvest has come . ||| La'pa wo'oni de ngatan wa , dewade matromni de nma nhei dioinia la , yoma reiki lerni nma ntutu-nte'ewa .
He said , How will we liken God 's Kingdom ? Or with what parable will we illustrate it ? ||| Yesus Nakot owa'ana , Tnairi hya ' a ta twatutu niohora Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu la E rimormiorni wawannu , onde tnairi yawalliohora hya ' pa takot nohora ?
It 's like a grain of mustard seed , which , when it is sown in the earth , though it is less than all the seeds that are on the earth , ||| Sasawi ola ida maka rtamnia la nhyi'ini de emolmolan nekama Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu la E rimormiorni . Sasawi ol de ha luwlu'wu id hade la ' a ha'ola korni mak kden la nohkeran di wawannu .
yet when it is sown , grows up and becomes greater than all the herbs , and puts out great branches , so that the birds of the sky can lodge under its shadow . ||| Mere la'pa nmori , de hota npoti-nkadwu , pa nareh niana yawuli-yatniamni re korni . Hota sasawi olli-tapalli re rpoti-rkadwu pa nhi'nande onu-ma'nu rma rapuon la ' a sasaw die tutnu-akni .
With many such parables he spoke the word to them , as they were able to hear it . ||| Yesus Nnairia lira yawalliohora mak emkade mamaini totpa Nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la riy rahu re . La'pa Nwatutu de E Nlernohora hya ' maka irna'erit nana .
Without a parable he did n't speak to them , but privately to his own disciples he explained everything . ||| La ' wniatutnu honona la ' a rirahu re , Yesus Nnairi mamainia yawalliohora . Mere la'pa E nor wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmeh ' a de Enwe'er doin momuoga totpena rna'erit nana .
On that day , when evening had come , he said to them , Let 's go over to the other side . ||| Ler de pa la'pa lera nheria dewade , Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Mai pia todia puou pa tla'awa danau de walli .
Leaving the multitude , they took him with them , even as he was , in the boat . Other small boats were also with him . ||| Yesus Namtatan ma'ta la puou ralamni de , dewade maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rto'or doinia rirahu re pa rha'at la puou pa ror rewre'wa Yesus la puou ralamni . Puou dom mana ror ir pa rhopal wa .
A big wind storm arose , and the waves beat into the boat , so much that the boat was already filled . ||| Noma anin lawna mana nten wia ne , yo'ora mana rriw lia puou ralamni nhi'nande puou npenpuen la tah ' i .
He himself was in the stern , asleep on the cushion , and they woke him up and asked him , Teacher , do n't you care that we are dying ? ||| Ler de de Yesus Nanin hala , Naklun reria la ' a puou li'ir tutnu . Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramata noka rakot la , Tuna O edonna Mhe'du nana ita , tsi ' pa tepar wa ? !
He awoke and rebuked the wind , and said to the sea , Peace ! Be still ! The wind ceased and there was a great calm . ||| Noma Namat pa nkamot targa anni me Nakot la tah ' i de , Hadewa , mulina-mule'ru ! Dewade anni mana edon nteni ne tah ' i de mana nalina wa .
He said to them , Why are you so afraid ? How is it that you have no faith ? ||| Noma Nakot la re , Nihya'pa mimta'at wenan miy emkadena ? ! Edonna mpiesiaya ma't A ' u ? !
They were greatly afraid and said to one another , Who then is this , that even the wind and the sea obey him ? ||| Ir honona ramta'at wenna , noma idma nakot la ida riwra , Riy di de he ' a pede yo'ora-anni nek de ratlina-ratailla ?
They came to the other side of the sea , into the country of the Gadarenes . ||| Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhopal pa rodi liarni la ' danau Galilea walli , la ' a riy Gerasa genni-tienni .
When he had come out of the boat , immediately a man with an unclean spirit met him out of the tombs . ||| La'pa Yesus Nerun la keranni , dewade muanke ' maka yatni-rha'ani ha rhu'ru ralma ida nlergot la hu'ula-liena la ' a tniamin mat geni ralamni pa nma nler temna .
He lived in the tombs . Nobody could bind him any more , not even with chains , ||| Riy de nhol lia hu'ula-liena mak kden la tniamin mat geni ralamni , ne riy id ho'mana edon narur pia nwut niana , rnairi wutwutu mnotna ho'mana ta'eni .
because he had been often bound with fetters and chains , and the chains had been torn apart by him , and the fetters broken in pieces . Nobody had the strength to tame him . ||| Yoma nhi'inde riy e rwutu-rkohog e limni-lakni , de rnairia wutwutu mnotna , mere na'ed lia inonni pa nwuhi eti-lahwa re la ' a limni , me nweyata ranti la ' a lakni . Riy id mana ta'en niana ntoran nana .
Always , night and day , in the tombs and in the mountains , he was crying out , and cutting himself with stones . ||| Lelera-melmel de , nden to'ola tniamin mat geni ralamni me la ' a wo'ora-kawru pa nhaunu-nhaunu me nal watu na ntu'tu nlakwehi tio ' inonni .
When he saw Jesus from afar , he ran and bowed down to him , ||| La'pa namkek nana Yesus Nwatiawua oliet pa Nmai wia dewade nawlar pia la nwatroma . Noka nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Yesus gaini ralamni .
and crying out with a loud voice , he said , What have I to do with you , Jesus , you Son of the Most High God ? I adjure you by God , do n't torment me . For he said to him , Come out of the man , you unclean spirit ! ||| Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hega'nu ne ! Mhuargot la riy di ralamni ! Dewade riy de nhaunu-nhaunu pa niwra , Yesus ee ! O ' de Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni A'nani O ' a ! Hota Omhi ' nana a ' g emkameni ee ! Omliokar pa mpuet la Uplerlawna nanni totpena yana Mukmua a ' u .
He asked him , What is your name ? He said to him , My name is Legion , for we are many . ||| Noma Yesus Natiana riy de Niwra , O nanmu he ' a ? Noma riy de nwalolla niwra , A na'nu Legion yoma am di de yatni-rha'ani liawanni . Nanni de nnia'eratni keki-rautu woka liawanni .
He begged him much that he would not send them away out of the country . ||| Noma nwakwak rer lia Yesus totpena Yesus yana Nhokar gota hare pa rhoitio'or doini la lowan de .
Now on the mountainside there was a great herd of pigs feeding . ||| La ' hande de e rehgorgorga gen miaka wawi wok lawna e rwayowar pa rahak pa ra'ana-remun la wo'ora hananni .
All the demons begged him , saying , Send us into the pigs , that we may enter into them . ||| Noma yatni-rha'ani re rwak lilili-mamuau lia Yesus totpena Nhopan nekpa irler la wawi re inonni ralamni .
At once Jesus gave them permission . The unclean spirits came out and entered into the pigs . The herd of about two thousand rushed down the steep bank into the sea , and they were drowned in the sea . ||| Yesus Nwayowa , dewade rlergot la riy de inonni , pa rla ' rhu'ru ralma wawi re , na'nama honona re rawlar pia rla rlererun la weran teti pa ema rwuwul wenwenna la ' danau de ralamni . Wawi honona re la'pa edon nhal de riwnu woru .
Those who fed the pigs fled , and told it in the city and in the country . The people came to see what it was that had happened . ||| Nhor nioka mak khuri-kwa'ana wawi re rawlar pia rla rod kiota la ' a ir letni me gen miaka rehgorgoru . Noma riy rlergot pa rma rpoi-rkeka ramkeka hya ' maka ha rakota re .
They came to Jesus , and saw him who had been possessed by demons sitting , clothed , and in his right mind , even him who had the legion , and they were afraid . ||| Riy rawok la Yesus onni pa ramkek memna riy maka yatni-rha'ani rlergot la de , e namtatan reria , nnairi oleka pola-raini me wniaror samomuou ed olek la ihranu ralamni . Noma riy honona re ramta'at wenna .
Those who saw it declared to them what happened to him who was possessed by demons , and about the pigs . ||| Riy mak kden hande maka ramkek oleka Yesus Nhokar doinia yatni-rha'ani re , rwahaur nohor hadel la ' a riy mak kmai re , ne rwahaur nohor walia wawi re .
They began to beg him to depart from their region . ||| Nhor na'nama riy mak kden hande rwak lilili-mamuau pua Yesus yan memmemna Nalo'on la ' gen die ne plet pa Nwaran nek wa .
As he was entering into the boat , he who had been possessed by demons begged him that he might be with him . ||| La'pa Yesus Nha'at owa'an la ' puou ralamni de , riy mak yatni-rha'ani re ha rlergot la de , nwak la Yesus totpena nlernohor rer wialia Yesus .
He did n't allow him , but said to him , Go to your house , to your friends , and tell them what great things the Lord has done for you and how he had mercy on you . ||| Mere Yesus Nahmena , pa Nakot la Niwra , Samomuounu de muwal lia genmu-tienmu , me mukot nohora Orgahi-Orha ' a ralam kalwiedni tiy o ' a , me la ' a hare honona mak samomomuou memna maka Enhi ' a-nyapi la o ' a .
He went his way , and began to proclaim in Decapolis how Jesus had done great things for him , and everyone marveled . ||| Dewade riy de nla'awa la'pa nakot nohora hare honona la mak kdena Dekapolis la ' a hya ' a maka Yesus ha Nhi ' a la e ' a . Ne riy honona mak katlin nan de rwer rer wiawni .
When Jesus had crossed back over in the boat to the other side , a great multitude was gathered to him , and he was by the sea . ||| Noma Yesus Nodi puou pa Nlereti owa'an la danau walli , dewade riy rahu lidna-lidan pa rmai pa rpe'pa reri E ' a la gera aratni .
Behold , one of the rulers of the synagogue , Jairus by name , came , and seeing him , he fell at his feet ||| Noma edon nalo'on wali ne Yairus makhi ' o'tani la ' a gen maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli de nmai wia . La'pa namkek nana Yesus dewade nwaltior la Yesus nayanni
and begged him much , saying , My little daughter is at the point of death . Please come and lay your hands on her , that she may be made healthy , and live . ||| na'nama nwak lilili-mamuau lia Yesus , niwra , Tuna , a a'nu patke ' a namehra pa trema-trema hota nmat wia . Awuak de , Mtiulan pa Mlia Mtieman la e ' a totpena nkalwied owa'ana , totpa yana nmati .
He went with him , and a great multitude followed him , and they pressed upon him on all sides . ||| Noka Yesus Nor riy de pa rla'awa . Riy rahu lidna-tauru rlernohora pa idma rde'da la ' a rde'da mai ida .
A certain woman who had a discharge of blood for twelve years , ||| La ' riy rahu re , de patke ' mak khur riara la ' a anni termida wehrani woru , e nor wali .
and had suffered many things by many physicians , and had spent all that she had , and was no better , but rather grew worse , ||| La'pa tilti'ila-walwial tiarga la yakrui-yagapnu la mak katu kakrui-kagapnu dokter pa nareiniande nahor dioini momuoga re'eni-tniarnu pa npair la makakrui-kagapnu , mere mehrani de edon nkalwied eti , mere yeher to ' pa na'itar la .
having heard the things concerning Jesus , came up behind him in the crowd and touched his clothes . ||| Natlin oleka hya ' a mak Yesus Nhi ' a , noma nwakriania Yesus la mutu letgarni . Ndella Yesus to'orni na'nama nteman la Yesus raini plalahwani .
For she said , If I just touch his clothes , I will be made well . ||| Yoma nwaror la ralamni , Hornama atieman to'ola raini plalahwani de , de hota akalwied wa .
Immediately the flow of her blood was dried up , and she felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction . ||| La'pa mtatande nekpa rarni mak kawdiadia ' i de nkeran wa , ne nat niohor memna inonni nkalwied wa .
Immediately Jesus , perceiving in himself that the power had gone out from him , turned around in the crowd and asked , Who touched my clothes ? ||| Mtatande nekpa Yesus Na'eram nana de rurni-laini nlergota la inonni , noka Nheri gaini pa Namkek la riy rahu re , na'nama Natiana re , He ' ed maka kteman la A rainu ?
His disciples said to him , You see the multitude pressing against you , and you say , ‘ Who touched me ? ' ||| Maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwahla , Omumkeka de riy rahu ri rpakdie'da la ' a O hermu-gaimu , mere Mutian owa'ana he ' ed mak kteman la O rayanmu ? !
He looked around to see her who had done this thing . ||| Noka Namkek la ' a-Namkek mai totpena Nahaka he ' ed maka khi ' nana hihi ' a-yapyap di .
But the woman , fearing and trembling , knowing what had been done to her , came and fell down before him , and told him all the truth . ||| Patke ' de namta'ata pa nruru yoma nat niohora hya ' ed maka khi ' olek la inonni , dewade nla nwaltiora-nwaltiemna la Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama nakota plele'er nohora hya ' a maka nhi ' oleka wa .
He said to her , Daughter , your faith has made you well . Go in peace , and be cured of your disease . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , O pesiaymu e narur mai A ' u ina pa mkialwied wa ! Mlia'awa pa mmuori-mdiar lia kalwiedni-paitiotni .
While he was still speaking , people came from the synagogue ruler 's house , saying , Your daughter is dead . Why bother the Teacher any more ? ||| La'pa Yesus enaltiertier mia'ta de dewade riy dom rwatiawu Yairus romni pa rmai rakot la Yairus de niwra , Tuna , a'namu nmati olekwa pa yana mpuaka Tungkur die pa nla ' a o rommu nayanni .
But Jesus , when he heard the message spoken , immediately said to the ruler of the synagogue , Do n't be afraid , only believe . ||| Mere Yesus edonna nhe'du nohora lirni re mere Nakot la Yairus Niwra , Yan mumta'ata . Mpuesiay niek wa .
He allowed no one to follow him except Peter , James , and John the brother of James . ||| Noma Yesus edonna Nhur niohora riy id wali pa Nora talla , atiaru Petrus , Yakowsi nor wutga hyalli Yohansi .
He came to the synagogue ruler 's house , and he saw an uproar , weeping , and great wailing . ||| La'pa rte'ela Yairus romni , ramkek nan de riy rahu mak kokna-krarnia . Rko ' a-rkakur nohora mat die .
When he had entered in , he said to them , Why do you make an uproar and weep ? The child is not dead , but is asleep . ||| Noma Yesus Nla'awa rialam pa Nakot la re , Nihya'pa mimkiokna-mriarni mkio ' a-mkiakru ? ! Hararar de edonna nmati , hade e nanin to ' a .
They ridiculed him . But he , having put them all out , took the father of the child , her mother , and those who were with him , and went in where the child was lying . ||| La'pa ratlin nana Yesus lirni de , noma honona riarin taru la yamalli . Noma Nhokar doin hare honona , na'nama Nod hararar de inni-amni ror wutga Petrus , Yakowsi me Yohansi pa ror rewre'wa rla'awa la hararar de genni la ' a rialma ,
Taking the child by the hand , he said to her , Talitha cumi ! which means , being interpreted , Girl , I tell you , get up ! ||| na'nama Ntorreria hararar de limni na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Talita kum , nnia'eratni de , Ina , A'ukot tiy o ' de , mumat wa !
Immediately the girl rose up and walked , for she was twelve years old . They were amazed with great amazement . ||| Mtatande nekpa hararar de naprir pia nala'awa . Hararar de umurnu termida wehrani woru olek wa . Riy mak kden la hande rwer rer wiawni la ' a hihi'-yapyap die .
He strictly ordered them that no one should know this , and commanded that something should be given to her to eat . ||| Mere Yesus Nlaran pa yan memmemna rakota hadella hehe ' a . Na'nama Yesus Nhopan pa ralla harar de pa na'ana .
He went out from there . He came into his own country , and his disciples followed him . ||| Noma Yesus Nor wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Nhoitio'or la gen die noma rawal lia ' Yesus letni-ruhunni .
When the Sabbath had come , he began to teach in the synagogue , and many hearing him were astonished , saying , Where did this man get these things ? and , What is the wisdom that is given to this man , that such mighty works come about by his hands ? ||| La'awa Sabat lerni dewade la Nwatutu-nwaye'ela gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli . Ne la'pa ratlin nana Yesus wniatutnu de , riy harahu rwer rer wiawni pa riwra , Ha Nlernana wniatutnu-wniaye'eni rilla ' hanmenio ? Kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou hya ' hadina ? Nlernana plola-mneha pa Nhi ' nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona la hanmeni ?
Is n't this the carpenter , the son of Mary and brother of James , Joses , Judah , and Simon ? Are n't his sisters here with us ? So they were offended at him . ||| Itat niohora de mak kawte'ta-kaprahni id to ' a hade pa edonna nhal de Ha inni nwawa Maria , ne hyalli re de Yakowsi , Yoses , Yudas nora Simona ? Ne ha narni patke ' a re nek de rden wal lia handi . La ' emkade pede honona re rwayotlia Yesus .
Jesus said to them , A prophet is not without honor , except in his own country , and among his own relatives , and in his own house . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka klol meni-meni to ' mana , rira rhu'ru-rhelam la , mere hota la ' letni-ruhunni me luwnu-a'nani meman nek de riy id mana edonna natlin la .
He could do no mighty work there , except that he laid his hands on a few sick people and healed them . ||| Ne onnila irakleha pesiay pede Yesus ta'en niana Nhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona la ' hande , enekneka Enlapar limni la ' a makamehra doma pa Nhi ' a pa rkalwieda .
He marveled because of their unbelief . He went around the villages teaching . ||| Mere Yesus Nwarora , Wah ! Nihya'pa riy korni mak kdella A le'tu ri rahmena rpesiaya A ' u ? ! Noma Yesus Nalala ' a la'pa Nwatutu-nwaye'ela leta ida nhor diemade leta ida .
He called to himself the twelve , and began to send them out two by two , and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits . ||| Noma Yesus Npol wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riy termida wehrani woru . Noma Yesus orgahani Nala ruri-lai la ir honona totpena rnairia pa ra rhokra-rlaiya hegana-kawnu , nhor nioka Nhopna rla ' a de riy maroro ' a rala ' wutu .
He commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey , except a staff only , no bread , no wallet , no money in their purse , ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hyal miy re , yana miodia hadomdoma la ' yala'ami de eneknek to'ama lie'ena . Yan miodia ya'ana-yemnu , arkai , onde kupna .
but to wear sandals , and not put on two tunics . ||| Mniairia laka wniowa mere yan miodia hewewta-naniairi ida-woru pa mhiernu miy rayanmi la ' talan ralma .
He said to them , Wherever you enter into a house , stay there until you depart from there . ||| Hota la roma-lewu maka riy rreiniana-ra'nan miy , de mdien nek la ir romni la'pa kniarmi la ' let de la nhorwua nanpena mpiaran la ' rom de .
Whoever will not receive you nor hear you , as you depart from there , shake off the dust that is under your feet for a testimony against them . Assuredly , I tell you , it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city ! ||| La'pa mlier la gen ida maka edonna kreinian miy onde edonna katlina-katail tiy miy die , mtio'or doin gen die , me mkiakan doinia awu mak kden la lakmi lia'armi totpa mtiutga de Uplerlawna Nwayotlia ira .
They went out and preached that people should repent . ||| Yesus Naltier pa Nhorwua noma riy maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rla rod kiota-ral de'eta Uplerlawna lirni riwra , Mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioini do'omi-halmi re !
They cast out many demons , and anointed many with oil who were sick and healed them . ||| Rhokar gotgota hegana-kawnu rahu , ne rawu'ru-ralena la riy rahu makamehra-kamau re , ne rhi ' a pa rkalwieda .
King Herod heard this , for his name had become known , and he said , John the Baptizer has risen from the dead , and therefore these powers are at work in him . ||| Ray Herodes mak kwenna Yohansi , mana natlin nohor walia Yesus , yoma nanni nwewar noha . Riy doma rakot nohora Yesus riwra , Matialo'onama Yohansi mak kharani e inhatti ! Enmati olek pa nmori owa'an pede nhi ' neka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona hya ' to'owa .
But others said , He is Elijah . Others said , He is a prophet , or like one of the prophets . ||| Dom de rakot nohora Yesus riwra , Hade de Eli edade , me dom de owa'ana riwra , Makwohorulu-ktatrulu edade , emekwalima makwohorulu-ktatrulu la ' a ululu genni .
But Herod , when he heard this , said , This is John , whom I beheaded . He has risen from the dead . ||| Mere la ' pa Herodes natlin nana lir de , dewade niwra , Hade de Yohansi maka Aghopan pa riy rdawr eti tiernu , mere nmori owa'ana !
For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias , his brother Philip 's wife , for he had married her . ||| Enakot emkade yoma la ler ululu la ' a Yohansi nmormior ma'ta de Herodes nhopan pa rtorna Yohansi na'nama rwutga pa rla rwi'it targa la roma nhio'la ralamni . Herodes nhi ' emkade yoma la ' a e hawni Herodias rerieini . Yoma Herodes hawni Herodias de , de Herodes hyalli Pilipsu haw ulullu .
For John had said to Herod , It is not lawful for you to have your brother 's wife . ||| Pede nhi'inde Yohansi nakot la Herodes niwra , Yan memmemna omuora hyalmu hawni de mmiehlima . Hade edon lol deulu-tatra .
Herodias set herself against him and desired to kill him , but she could n't , ||| Lirni de narieiniande Herodias , Herodes hawni de , na'andoin gahani la Yohansi , ne nwaror pa nwenna , mere ta'en niana ,
for Herod feared John , knowing that he was a righteous and holy man , and kept him safe . When he heard him , he did many things , and he heard him gladly . ||| yoma hawni Herodes napili-nahniari Yohanis di onnila natga de , Yohanis di de riy plollola-mneneha , nakleha do ' a-hala , pa nhi'nande nliwan reria . Mere la'pa Herodes natlin nana Yohansi lirni noma Herodes namta'ata , mere ralamni nahepur to'ola yatlina la Yohansi lirni .
Then a convenient day came when Herod on his birthday made a supper for his nobles , the high officers , and the chief men of Galilee . ||| Mere Herodias nwewiei-nnarnara lerni pa nwunu-nwenna . Lerni nmai wa la ' Herodes ler kalwiedni . La ' ler de Herodes nhi ' a muki-hepru ya'anlawna-yemunlawna la tniutnu-nhianni-nhielli-liarni , o'ta-mata mak kodi kekni-rautnu , me riy lalawna la Galilea .
When the daughter of Herodias herself came in and danced , she pleased Herod and those sitting with him . The king said to the young lady , Ask me whatever you want , and I will give it to you . ||| La ' ler de de Herodias a'nani patke ' a nloi lia makhopnu-makpepna gaini ralamni . Lioini-nhiekni de nla ' nan meman la Herodes nora makhopnu-makpepna re ralamni . Nreiniande Herodes nakot la hararar de niwra , Ralammu nwaka hya ' a-hya ' a to ' a , pena agala tiy o ' a .
He swore to her , Whatever you ask of me , I will give you , up to half of my kingdom . ||| Noma Herodes nlokar memna la pat hararar de gaini ralamni niwra , Hya ' a-hya ' to ' maka mpuaka de agala tiy o ' a , la'pa a plo'lu-mneh ' u hai'ru di walli mano omliernana !
She went out and said to her mother , What shall I ask ? She said , The head of John the Baptizer . ||| Harar de la ' pa natian nohora inni niwra , Hya ' ed maka hota awuaka ? Inni nwahla niwra , Yohansi makharani de o'tani !
She came in immediately with haste to the king and requested , I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptizer on a platter . ||| Noma harar de pleta-plet pa nla'awa ray Herodes pa nwaka , Tuna , awuak pa la ' dodo'ondi de mkien tio ' a Yohansi makharani o'tani la totopa , pa muala mai a ' u .
The king was exceedingly sorry , but for the sake of his oaths and of his dinner guests , he did n't wish to refuse her . ||| La'pa Herodes natlin nana hararar de wakwakni dewade ralamni ntuin doin la . Mere takotpa , nlokar pa lira olek hadewa ne mak kmai pia kor wutga Herodes pa ra'an de ratlin momuoga oleka pa nhi'nande Herodes nahmena nwayotlia wakwakni .
Immediately the king sent out a soldier of his guard and commanded to bring John 's head , and he went and beheaded him in the prison , ||| Herodes pleta-plet pa nhar lirni totpena rla rotan doinia Yohansi makharani die o'tani la ' a roma nhio'la ralamni na'nama rkenia o'tani la totopa pa rma rtemna la hararar de limni .
and brought his head on a platter , and gave it to the young lady , and the young lady gave it to her mother . ||| La'pa edon nalo'on ma'ta de rken nian Yohansi o'tani la totopa ralamni pa rma ralla pat hararar de . Nhor nioma pat hararar de nodia Yohansi o'tani pa nod tiargho ' a la inni .
When his disciples heard this , they came and took up his corpse and laid it in a tomb . ||| La'pa maklernohor reria Yohansi makharani ratlin nana , noma rma ra'ala Yohansi inonni pa rla rhuwria .
The apostles gathered themselves together to Jesus , and they told him all things , whatever they had done , and whatever they had taught . ||| La'awa lerni pa maka Yesus ha Nhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re rawal pia rakot nohora hya ' a maka ha rwatutu me rhi ' nana re honona la Yesus .
He said to them , Come away into a deserted place , and rest awhile . For there were many coming and going , and they had no leisure so much as to eat . ||| Noka Yesus Nakot la re , Mai pia tla'awa gen miaka hgali totpa tmeh ' a , ne tren kuku ' it la ' hande . Yoma riy rahu maka kla ' a-kmai re , nhi'nande ya'ana mana ta'en niana .
They went away in the boat to a deserted place by themselves . ||| Noma irmehmeh ' a rodi puou pa rla'awa gen miaka hgali .
They saw them going , and many recognized him and ran there on foot from all the cities . They arrived before them and came together to him . ||| Mere la'pa rwaran wa dewade , riy rahu ramkek nohora pa rat niohora gen miaka ir rokria de . Pede riy rahu pleta-pleta pa rlol keranni totpa rmai tiemna , rwatiawua letni-ruhunni la meni-meni pa rala ' ulga re .
Jesus came out , saw a great multitude , and he had compassion on them because they were like sheep without a shepherd , and he began to teach them many things . ||| La'pa Yesus Nerun la puou pa namkek la riy rariahu re , de ralamni ntuin doin la pa Niwra Ntulan la ira yoma ir rakleha riy mak ktutga talla mak kaplollol la ' ira . Honona re emolmolla pipi-duma mak kakleha riy mak kodi . Noma Nwatutga ir la ' a nnio ' a-niatu harahu .
When it was late in the day , his disciples came to him and said , This place is deserted , and it is late in the day . ||| Ne lera nheria pa mak Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rma rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , lera nheria wa . Ne la ' gen di ho'mana olieta la leta
Send them away , that they may go into the surrounding country and villages and buy themselves bread , for they have nothing to eat . ||| pede Mhuopan nekpa ir orgahani rla rawelia ya'ana-yemnu la ' a leta-leta re mak rehgorgoru .
But he answered them , You give them something to eat . They asked him , Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread and give them something to eat ? ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la , Pena mialla ra'ana . Noma rakot la riwra , Ita'ala kupna-kai maka riy nhi'inde rlernana la wolla wo'awa gahani memna pa itaweli roti totpa talla ra'ana ? !
He said to them , How many loaves do you have ? Go see . When they knew , they said , Five , and two fish . ||| Noka Nakot la , Roti wo'ir mak miy miodi rena ? Mimkek teka ! La'pa ramkeka pa nhor nioka riwra , Roti wolima me i'na woru .
He commanded them that everyone should sit down in groups on the green grass . ||| Nhor nia'nama Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rhopna riy honona re ramtatna momuoga la wewna motmota wawannu , ne rnawera la wokni-wokni .
They sat down in ranks , by hundreds and by fifties . ||| Noka hare mana rawok pa ramtatna . Wokni dom de , terampwolima me wokni dom owa'an de rahu ida .
He took the five loaves and the two fish , and looking up to heaven , he blessed and broke the loaves , and he gave to his disciples to set before them , and he divided the two fish among them all . ||| Noma Yesus Na'ala rot dieulu re wolima , me i'na rora , na'nama Nwatniar la heyanan pa Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna . Na'nama Nhawi-nhawia roti re na'nama Nala la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhakre'era la ' a riy mutlialawna re honona . Nal walia i'n de pa Nhakre'era la riy rahu re .
They all ate and were filled . ||| Honona re ra'an pa rpehera .
They took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and also of the fish . ||| Ra'an pa rwair wa , noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , rwaho ' a-rwatierun wa de rawok nana roti me i'na mak ha ra'an atre ' a , de kriou penpuenu termida wehrani woru .
Those who ate the loaves were five thousand men . ||| Mak ka'an momuou lia hande , la'pa edon nhal de muanke ' a riwnu wolima , me edonna rhor wut mua'ta la patke ' a ror wutga upni-a'nani .
Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go ahead to the other side , to Bethsaida , while he himself sent the multitude away . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhopan pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rodi puou rleretia danau pa rala ' ulu E ' a la Betsaida , ne Nhopan pa riy mutlialawna re rawal wia .
After he had taken leave of them , he went up the mountain to pray . ||| Dewade Yesus Nha'at la wo'ora id hananni totpa Nsumbaini .
When evening had come , the boat was in the middle of the sea , and he was alone on the land . ||| Mere la'pa mela ndamit nana , de maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re puounu ed olek la danau letgarni , ne Yesus Nmemeh ' a Ndella keranni .
Seeing them distressed in rowing , for the wind was contrary to them , about the fourth watch of the night he came to them , walking on the sea , and he would have passed by them , ||| Noma Namkek de , maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ta'eni rwain nana puounu , yoma anni mak klol gaini newat nana . La'pa repreparreria de Yesus Nala ' lola tah ' i ulti wawannu pa Nla Nlernohora puou mak oliet olek la E ' a . Nalala ' a pa Nwakriania na'nama Ntot pa Nala ' ulu ira .
but they , when they saw him walking on the sea , supposed that it was a ghost , and cried out , ||| La'pa ir honona la puou die ramkek tutga E maimiaini de lola tah ' i ulti wawannu de rhoiya la hegan lora , reiniande honona re polpuollu-hawaunnu ,
for they all saw him and were troubled . But he immediately spoke with them and said to them , Cheer up ! It is I ! Do n't be afraid . ||| yoma honona re ramta'at wenna onnila hya ' maka ha ramkek nan de . Mere Yesus Nleretniekla Nakot la re Niwra , Yan mimta'ata , Yesus A ' g inhatti .
He got into the boat with them , and the wind ceased , and they were very amazed among themselves , and marveled , ||| Noka Nha'at la ira puounu , ne anin lawan de mana namtie'ela wa , dewade maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwer rerer wiawni ,
for they had n't understood about the loaves , but their hearts were hardened . ||| yoma raplin niohora la ' emkameni la Yesus Nhi ' nan hade . Yoma la ' ler ululu maka ramkeka roti maka rehenu la riy riwnu wolima re mana raplin nohor yala'ani , mere ralamni ratehra to'owa .
When they had crossed over , they came to land at Gennesaret and moored to the shore . ||| La ' pa rleretia danau pa rte'ela danau aratni la ' a leta Genesaret na'nama rapnial lia hande .
When they had come out of the boat , immediately the people recognized him , ||| La'pa rerun la puou , mak kden hande ramkek tut niana mak kmai die Yesus inhatta .
and ran around that whole region , and began to bring those who were sick on their mats to where they heard he was . ||| Noma rawlar pia rla'awa leta-ruhun maka rehgorgoru pa rhim nana mak kamehra-kamau , mak kanin rer tio'ola u'ti wawannu re , pa rodia la Yesus la ' a geni-tien maka ratlin nana Ndella .
Wherever he entered-into villages , or into cities , or into the country-they laid the sick in the marketplaces and begged him that they might just touch the fringe of his garment , and as many as touched him were made well . ||| La ' meni-meni maka Yesus Nla ' a de , la ' a let paheli-ruhun patatra re , de rken tiarga mak kamehra-kamau re la ya'olu-yala ' a geni ralamni . Mak kodia makamehra-kamau re rwak lilili-mamuau lia Yesus totpa makamehra-kamau re rteman to'ola Yesus rayanni tawnu totpena rkalwieda . Dewade he'-he ' mak kteman nan to ' a Yesus rayanni tawnu re , honona rnek pa rler la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
Then the Pharisees and some of the scribes gathered together to him , having come from Jerusalem . ||| Lera ida ne Parisi wokni id nor wutga makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re rwatiawua Yerusalem pa rma rwahaka Yesus . Rma rpepan reria noma
Now when they saw some of his disciples eating bread with defiled , that is unwashed , hands , they found fault . ||| ramkek de maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a dom de ra'ana mere edon rohma limni emeka hya ' maka upni-tgarni rwatut tiarga la ' ululu .
For the Pharisees and all the Jews do n't eat unless they wash their hands and forearms , holding to the tradition of the elders . ||| Parisi mniotni ra'itra Yahudi re korni rlernohora hya ' mak upni-tgarni rdeul taru-rtatar targ oleka wa pa ra'ana de rohma limni .
They do n't eat when they come from the marketplace unless they bathe themselves , and there are many other things which they have received to hold to , washings of cups , pitchers , bronze vessels , and couches . ||| Ne la'pa rwatiawua ya'olu-yala ' geni de edon rohma limni ma'ta de , ta'en nian ra'ana . Nhioli-lieta , pa'etu-parahmani korni maka upni-tgarni rwatut tiarga oleka re , rlernohora momuoga , emekto ' a rohma lari niemun geni , kekna-rana , me hewewta-naniair pi'ra .
The Pharisees and the scribes asked him , Why do n't your disciples walk according to the tradition of the elders , but eat their bread with unwashed hands ? ||| La ' hade pede Parisi mniotni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ratiana Yesus , Nihya'pa riy maka Ompuatutu-mpuaye ' a re edon rmor niohora it upni-tgarni deullu-tatarni ? ! Ira'an de edonna rohma ulga limni .
He answered them , Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites , as it is written , ‘ This people honors me with their lips , but their heart is far from me . ||| Yesus Nwahla re Niwra , Plol memna la ' lir wowohora maka Yesaya nakot nohora miy miak mtiot pa mpial lia riy plollola mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Niwra , Emkadilla Uplerlawna lirni , Rimormiori ri eneknek to'ama ral nurnu tutnu re rha'wa nan to ' A na'nu , mere ralamni re olieta mai A ' u .
They worship me in vain , teaching as doctrines the commandments of men . ' ||| Hare kniola tiernu-niawur nehlani mai A ' die hamamuamua re yoma ira rwatut tio ' a rimormiori wniatutnu-wniaye'eni .
For you set aside the commandment of God , and hold tightly to the tradition of men-the washing of pitchers and cups , and you do many other such things . ||| Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de , miy edon mhie'du nana , mere rimormiori deullu-tatarni nanpena mtie'la rer pitpitga .
He said to them , Full well do you reject the commandment of God , that you may keep your tradition . ||| Miy edon mliernohora Uplerlawna lirni de , mere mimliernohor to ' a miy upmi-tgarmi deullu-tatarni .
For Moses said , ‘ Honor your father and your mother , ' and , ‘ He who speaks evil of father or mother , let him be put to death . ' ||| Yoma Musa niwra , Mhiu'ru-mhielam la inmi-ammi , ne la'pa hameni nwohora-ntatra inni-amni , de hota nlernana niukum matmiati .
But you say , ‘ If a man tells his father or his mother , Whatever profit you might have received from me is Corban , ' that is to say , given to God , ||| Mere mpiatutu-mpiaye ' de edon nhala pa riy id nakot la inni-amni niwra , Agiwa galla miy , mere agal oleka la Uplerlawna .
then you no longer allow him to do anything for his father or his mother , ||| Noma mhiur niohora riy de , pa hota edon na'unni-namta'ata inni-amni .
making void the word of God by your tradition which you have handed down . You do many things like this . ||| La ' talan emkade pede miy edon mliernohora Uplerlawna lirni de , mere mliernohor to ' a miy upmi-tgarmi deullu-tatarni maka mpiatutu-mpiaye ' a re . Ne mpiatutu deulu-tatra harahu mak emkade wali mak kreiniande riy edon ratlina-ratailla Uplerlawna lirni .
He called all the multitude to himself and said to them , Hear me , all of you , and understand . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Npol lia riy rahu mak kden handi pa rma rawoka ne Nakot la re Niwra , Hononmi mitlina totpena miatga .
There is nothing from outside of the man that going into him can defile him , but the things which proceed out of the man are those that defile the man . ||| Mak ita'ana edon nhi ' akdeha-aktiahl ita . Eneknek to'ama yatyatni-halalli maka itakot nohora me tsi ' nana . Hade ed maka khi ' pa takdeha-taktiahli .
If anyone has ears to hear , let him hear ! ||| He ' tlinni erla de , totpa natlin reri !
When he had entered into a house away from the multitude , his disciples asked him about the parable . ||| Nhor nioka Yesus Nhoitio'or doin riy rahu re pa Nla'awa roma ida nayanni , na'nama maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana riwra , Tuna , Mtiulan pa Mukot nohora yawalliohora de nnia'eratni mai ami .
He said to them , Are you also without understanding ? Do n't you perceive that whatever goes into the man from outside ca n't defile him , ||| Yesus Niwra , Miy die emek ir wal pia edonna miat mua'ta lira re nnia'eratni ? ! Miy e miplin mua'ta mak itlumu-ttella de edon khi ' akdeha-aktiahl ita ? !
because it does n't go into his heart , but into his stomach , then into the latrine , making all foods clean ? ||| Yoma maka itlumu-ttella de edonna la'awa it ihranu ralamni mere , la'awa it apannu ralamni ne hota nlergot owa'ana ! Emkade de Yesus Nakot Niwra ya'ana-yemnu honona de , raya'ana-rayemun momuou .
He said , That which proceeds out of the man , that defiles the man . ||| Yesus Nakot la , Mak kwatiawua it ralamni ed maka khi ' rira pa rakdeha-raktiahli .
For from within , out of the hearts of men , proceed evil thoughts , adulteries , sexual sins , murders , thefts , ||| Yoma it ihranu ralamni ed mak kodia ralma-rior yotyota-yatyata , pa nhi'nande riy ralira-raliai , rkamnelu-rkamna ' a , rwunu-rwenna ,
covetings , wickedness , deceit , lustful desires , an evil eye , blasphemy , pride , and foolishness . ||| riy ralamni rapal niana re ' a-tniaru kupna-kai , rahankerna-raralmha'ara , pudi-akla ohpa-lahara , pareta-pahawa , ihru yata-ralam yata , rapolu-raliella rira , tulu-petna , raplin niohora talan plollola .
All these evil things come from within and defile the man . ||| Do ' a-hala honona re rwatiawua riy ihranu ralamni , pa rhi ' rira pa rakdeha-raktiahli .
From there he arose and went away into the borders of Tyre and Sidon . He entered into a house and did n't want anyone to know it , but he could n't escape notice . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhoitio'or la ' gen die , ne Nla'awa leta Tirus yapatni . Nla'awa roma ida nayanni , ne nahmen pa riy rat niohora , mere maimiaini de ta'en niana rawunmua .
For a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit , having heard of him , came and fell down at his feet . ||| Noka patke ' a ida maka a'nani patke ' a hegana nhu'ru ralma , natlin nana Yesus etla hande , noka plet pa nmai pia nwaltiora-nwaltiemna la Yesus lakni onni .
Now the woman was a Greek , a Syrophoenician by race . She begged him that he would cast the demon out of her daughter . ||| Patke ' de Yahudi atia ' a , mak kwatiawua Fenisia yapatni la ' a Siria . Nwak la Yesus niwra , Tungkurg ee , Mtiulan pa Mhuokar doini hegan mak khu'ru ralma a a'nu .
But Jesus said to her , Let the children be filled first , for it is not appropriate to take the children 's bread and throw it to the dogs . ||| Yesus Nnairi yawalliohora pa Nakot la , Ndella pa papay ra'an pa rpeher ulu , yoma taken niana ra'ala papay ya'anni-yemannu pa rhopliala ahu gaini , ina .
But she answered him , Yes , Lord . Yet even the dogs under the table eat the children 's crumbs . ||| Noma patke ' de nakot la Yesus niwra , Plola , plola Matroma . Mere ahu mak kdella mei nayanni mana na'an walia yamanan lu'wu maka keke'eni re ratunia .
He said to her , For this saying , go your way . The demon has gone out of your daughter . ||| Noka Yesus Nakot la patke ' de , Onnila lirmu di , mlia ' meman la dodo'ondi , yoma hegan de ema ratargot oleka la a'namu ralamni .
She went away to her house , and found the child having been laid on the bed , with the demon gone out . ||| Patke ' de nawal lia roma nayanni . La ' de nlernana a'nani e nanina la lewu wawannu , ne hegan de ema ratargot oleka wa .
Again he departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidon , and came to the sea of Galilee through the middle of the region of Decapolis . ||| Noma Yesus Nwaran la Tirus , ne la Nlola Sidon nhor diewade Nlola Dekapolis lowanni pa Nokria danau Galilea .
They brought to him one who was deaf and had an impediment in his speech . They begged him to lay his hand on him . ||| La ' hande de riy rodia mak khatilu-khamanu id la , ne rwak la riwra , Tungkurg ee , Mtiulan pa Mliapar limmu la riy di wawannu .
He took him aside from the multitude privately and put his fingers into his ears , and he spat and touched his tongue . ||| La'pa Yesus Nahala la riy rahu re totpa rmeh ' a , na'nama Ntuwnu okarni la riy de tlinni hu'ulli , na'nama Nakrui la pa Nteman la ' a riy de namni .
Looking up to heaven , he sighed , and said to him , Ephphatha ! that is , Be opened ! ||| Nhor nioka Yesus Nwatniar rer lia lyanti , ne Nhedga aranni na'nama Nakot la , Efata ! nnia'eratni de Muphyar wia .
Immediately his ears were opened , and the impediment of his tongue was released , and he spoke clearly . ||| Noma riy de tlinni naphyar wia ne , mtatan de nekpa namni wniutnu mana natiewar doin la , ne naltier samomuou wa .
He commanded them that they should tell no one , but the more he commanded them , so much the more widely they proclaimed it . ||| Dewade Yesus Nano ' a mak kdella hande pa totpa yana rwahaur nohora la riy . Mere yeher to ' pa Nano ' a la ira , yeher neka rla rwahaur nohora la ' a meni-meni .
They were astonished beyond measure , saying , He has done all things well . He makes even the deaf hear and the mute speak ! ||| Riy mak katlin nan de rwer rer wiawni pa riwra , Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni honona re , samomuou memna ! Mak khatilu mana Nhi ' a pa ratlina , me maka khamanu mana Nhi ' pa raltieri .
In those days , when there was a very great multitude , and they had nothing to eat , Jesus called his disciples to himself and said to them , ||| Lera ida ne riy rahu rawoka owa'an la Yesus onni . Riy rahu re rakleh yamanna pede Yesus Npol lia maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rma rawoka na'nama Niwra ,
I have compassion on the multitude , because they have stayed with me now three days and have nothing to eat . ||| A ralmu ntuin doin la ' rimormior mutlialawna ri . Hari e rlernohor rer A lia lera wotelu mere ha rakleha yamanna .
If I send them away fasting to their home , they will faint on the way , for some of them have come a long way . ||| La'pa Agolin doin hare pa rla'awa de apannu rahgali , yanhi'pa gaini rmokal lol talan letgara , yoma dom de rwatiawua geni-tiena mak olieta .
His disciples answered him , From where could one satisfy these people with bread here in a deserted place ? ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana , La ' a gen hgal di de hota itlernana yamanan la hanmeni , pa itala la rirahu ri ra'ana ? !
He asked them , How many loaves do you have ? They said , Seven . ||| La ' a wareher genmi , rot wo'ir erla ? Rwahla riwra , Wo'itu .
He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground , and he took the seven loaves . Having given thanks , he broke them and gave them to his disciples to serve , and they served the multitude . ||| Noma Yesus Nhopan pa riy mutlialawna re rakpernernia la tani wawannu . Dewade Yesus Na'ala roti mieha re wo'itu na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna . Nhor nia'nama Nhawi-nhawia re pa Nala la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhakre'era la rimormioria niutni-mdierna re .
They also had a few small fish . Having blessed them , he said to serve these also . ||| Maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rodia i'na prowta ida-woru wali . Dewade Yesus Na'uli-nawedi owa'an Uplerlawna , nhor nia'nama Nhopan pa rhakra i'na rella .
They ate and were filled . They took up seven baskets of broken pieces that were left over . ||| Rirahu re ra'an pa rpehera , na'nama maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwaho ' a-rwatierun de rlernana maka ha ra'an atre ' a , de kriou penpuenu wo'itu .
Those who had eaten were about four thousand . Then he sent them away . ||| Rhor momuoga mak ka'ana re la'pa edon nhal de riy riwnu wogata . Nhorwua dewade Yesus Nhopan pa honona rawal lia ' genni-tienni .
Immediately he entered into the boat with his disciples and came into the region of Dalmanutha . ||| Na'nama Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rha'at la puou pa rla'awa Dalmanut yapatni .
The Pharisees came out and began to question him , seeking from him a sign from heaven and testing him . ||| Noma riy Parisi rma ratian la ' a-ratian mai Yesus . Riwra rtota Yesus la klieratni pede rhopan pa Yesus Ntutga hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona id totpena irat muemna de Yesus plolli-mneheni nwatiawua Uplerlawna .
He sighed deeply in his spirit and said , Why does this generation seek a sign ? Most certainly I tell you , no sign will be given to this generation . ||| Noma Yesus Nhedga aranni Niwra , Adoh ! Nihya'pa rimormiori la lera-mela ri rhopan pa Aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona ? ! Mere mitlino ! Hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona kuku ' nek ho'mana , A ' g edon tiutga tiy miy .
He left them , and again entering into the boat , departed to the other side . ||| Nhor nioka Nto'or doinia ir la hande pa Nha'at owa'an la puou pa rleret lia walli .
They forgot to take bread , and they did n't have more than one loaf in the boat with them . ||| La ' noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhortaplin pa edon rodi wareherni roti , enekneka ida nmeh ' a la puou ralamni .
He warned them , saying , Take heed , beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of Herod . ||| Noma Yesus Nwagahniorta re Niwra , Hyalia , mhioratreria ! Hota miy ererma la ' a tgo ' a Parisi rora ray Herodes .
They reasoned with one another , saying , It 's because we have no bread . ||| Noma rwarora pa idma nakot la ida riwra , Nakot emkade yoma itakleh roti .
Jesus , perceiving it , said to them , Why do you reason that it 's because you have no bread ? Do n't you perceive yet or understand ? Is your heart still hardened ? ||| Yesus Nat niohora hya ' ed maka ha rakotkota pede Nakot la re , Nihya'pa miakokan nohora roti hadamonna ? ! Miy ralma-riormi edonna nla ' nan ma'ta ? ! Ralammi ratehra to'owa .
Having eyes , do n't you see ? Having ears , do n't you hear ? Do n't you remember ? ||| Matmi reprepra mere edon mimkek nana , ne mtiaru tlina mere edon mitail nana . Miy edonna mhiorat nan ma'ta ? !
When I broke the five loaves among the five thousand , how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up ? They told him , Twelve . ||| La ' lera maka Aghawierie'er roti wolim pa Agaitiutur nana riy riwnu wolima , de miy orgahami miwok nan korni kriou penpuen re , maka ha ra'an atre ' a re wo'ira ? Rwahla riwra , Kriou termida wehrani woru .
When the seven loaves fed the four thousand , how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up ? They told him , Seven . ||| Ne la ' walia rot mieha wo'itu maka Agala tiutria riy riwnu wogata , dewade miwok rehenu de kriou penpuenu re wo'ira ? Rwahla riwra , Kriou wo'itu .
He asked them , Do n't you understand yet ? ||| Noma Nakot la re , Miy ralma-riormi edonna nla ' nan ma'ta ? !
He came to Bethsaida . They brought a blind man to him and begged him to touch him . ||| Nhor nioka Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rte'ela leta Betsaida . La ' hande de , riy rodia maka matni yata id pa rla rwak la Yesus pa , totpa Nteman nana la .
He took hold of the blind man by the hand , and brought him out of the village . When he had spat on his eyes , and laid his hands on him , he asked him if he saw anything . ||| Yesus Nte'la la mat yata de limni pa Nodgiota la leta to'orni . Noma Nakrui lia riy de matni , ne Nteman limni la riy de matni , noma Natiana Niwra , Mumkek oleka hadomdoma ?
He looked up , and said , I see men , but I see them like walking trees . ||| Riy de namkek la gaini , nhor nioka niwra , A'umkek nan riy , yoma a'umkeka riy ralala ' a , mere yamkekni emolmolan to ' a orona-augona .
Then again he laid his hands on his eyes . He looked intently , and was restored , and saw everyone clearly . ||| Yesus Ntemn owa'an limni la riy de matni , dewade riy de ntot pa niwra namkeka na'nama riy de matni nkalwied wa , nhi'nande namkek nana hya ' a-hya ' de reprepra .
He sent him away to his house , saying , Do n't enter into the village , nor tell anyone in the village . ||| Nhor nioka Yesus Nhopan pa riy de nla'awa romni mere Nakot la , Mlia ' de yana mliola leta de ralamni pa mpiahauria hadi !
Jesus went out , with his disciples , into the villages of Caesarea Philippi . On the way he asked his disciples , Who do men say that I am ? ||| Noma Yesus Nor mutwualli re rla ' a leta-ruhun mak kdella leta Kaisarea Pilipi onni . La ' talan letgara Enatiana mutwualli mak ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Nhi'inde riy e riwra A ' die he ' o ?
They told him , John the Baptizer , and others say Elijah , but others , one of the prophets . ||| Noma mutwualli re rwet la riwra , Tuna , riy dom de riwra Yohansi makharani O ' a , mak kmori owa'ana , dom de riwra makwohorulu-ktatrulu Eli . Dom de riwra makwohorulu-ktatrulu dom to ' a .
He said to them , But who do you say that I am ? Peter answered , You are the Christ . ||| Noka Yesus Natian owa'ana , Mere A'utian tek miy . La ' miy wniarormi de , A ' di de he ' A ' u ? Noma Petrus nwet la , Matro'mu , O ' di de Ray mak kodia mormiori-lewlewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru Mesias O inhatti !
He commanded them that they should tell no one about him . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Maka Petrus nakota de naplol memna mere yan memmemna mikot nohor ma'ta hadella riy doma .
He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things , and be rejected by the elders , the chief priests , and the scribes , and be killed , and after three days rise again . ||| La ' ler de de pa nodi liarni Yesus Nwe'er doin meman la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , de Uplerlawna ralma-riorni totpena Rimormiori A'na E ' de hota Ntutulu-nlelewua kropna-krieutu , yamuki-yama'ala , me hota ina-ama Yahudi rora imam-imam re o'tani-matni , me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rwayotli E ' a . Ne Uplerlawna Nala pa hota rwen E ' a mere la'pa nodia la lera wotellu owa'an de Enmori owa'an la E matmiati ralamni .
He spoke to them openly . Peter took him and began to rebuke him . ||| Nakota ploloi-plele'era lir di . Noma Petrus nheduma pa nte'la la Yesus pa rla'awa walli na'nama npolliohora Yesus pa nakot la , Matroma , awuakwak de Uplerlawna Nter dioini-nhal doinia mak Omukot de !
But he , turning around and seeing his disciples , rebuked Peter , and said , Get behind me , Satan ! For you have in mind not the things of God , but the things of men . ||| Hya ' maka Petrus nakota de edon nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pede Yesus Nkillia maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re na'nama Nawenan la Petrus Niwra , Eh , mlia'awa walli hega'nu ne ! La'pa omiwra hota A ' g edon lier la yamuki-yama'ala de wniarormu de wniarora rimormioria de . Wniaror de edonna nwatiawua Uplerlawna .
He called the multitude to himself with his disciples and said to them , Whoever wants to come after me , let him deny himself , and take up his cross , and follow me . ||| Noka Yesus Npolga riy mutlialawna rora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa Nakot la Niwra , Riy meni mak kiwra klernohor A ' u , de nhoratdoin momuoga hya ' ed maka e ralamni nod rer lia , ne nre ' wut lia A ' pua nler la yamuki-yama'ala onde matmiati pa emolmolan nekama nhoi wawayanni la auwlakra pa nlernohor A ' u .
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it , and whoever will lose his life for my sake and the sake of the Good News will save it . ||| Yoma la'pa hameni maka edon nhoratdoinia mormiorni noh di wawannu de hota e ' edon nler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Mere la'pa riy maka khoratdoinia mormiorni la noh di wawannu onnila A ' u me Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni rerieini , de hota nlernana mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
For what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and forfeit his life ? ||| La'pa riy mak klernana nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu honona mere hota edonna nlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni , de hota re'eni-tniarnu re nodi untu hya ' la ' riy dena ? !
For what will a man give in exchange for his life ? ||| Nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu honona , ta'en niana nawel niana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de mai ita toh ? !
For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation , the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him when he comes in his Father 's glory with the holy angels . ||| La'pa he ' maka kmola-kma ' pa kreinian A ' u me kwayow nana A li'ru-A tu'nu la ' riy yatyata-halala mak kahmena pesiay gaini ralamni la ' a lera-mela ri , de hota Rimormiori A'na A ' muana , muola-mua ' wal pia rieinian riy della , la ' ler maka hota Amuai owa'an de godia A A'mu plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni pa Agor wutga Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikat mak edon kheik la do ' a-hala ralamni Ammai die .
He said to them , Most certainly I tell you , there are some standing here who will in no way taste death until they see God 's Kingdom come with power . ||| Mhioratreria ! Hota la ' a miy hononmi la handi de riy dom de mak edonna rmati mia'ta mere hota ramkek ulu Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka mak ktorna-krautu .
After six days Jesus took with him Peter , James , and John , and brought them up onto a high mountain privately by themselves , and he was changed into another form in front of them . ||| Noma la'pa lera wonema rlardoinla noma Yesus Nodia Petrus nor Yakowsi me Yohansi pa rmeh ' a rla'awa wo'or tutulu id hananni . La'pa rwatniar temna Yesus de gaini to'ama .
His clothing became glistening , exceedingly white , like snow , such as no launderer on earth can whiten them . ||| Ne naniayarni hitita-reprepra . Riy id la nohkerkeran di wawannu mana edonna namkek taru naniair wawahra mak emkade .
Elijah and Moses appeared to them , and they were talking with Jesus . ||| Plin-plinnianamde maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramkek nan walia Elia , Musa rora Yesus rwahauru .
Peter answered Jesus , Rabbi , it is good for us to be here . Let 's make three tents , one for you , one for Moses , and one for Elijah . ||| Noma Petrus nakot la Yesus Niwra , Tungkurga , itden la handi de samoga , pa hota Ompuayowa de amariria hoiwiali wotel lia handi totpena id la O ' a , id la Musa , ne id wal lia Elia .
For he did n't know what to say , for they were very afraid . ||| Nakot emkade yoma naplin niohora hota hya ' maka ha nakota yoma ramta'at wenna .
A cloud came , overshadowing them , and a voice came out of the cloud , This is my beloved Son . Listen to him . ||| Dewade kakam lawn ida npupun nana re noka ratlin nana lira ida nwatiawua kakam de ralamni pa Niwra , A A'nu maka Asiayn memna inhatti . Mitlin la E lirni .
Suddenly looking around , they saw no one with them any more , except Jesus only . ||| Plin-plinnianamde la'pa rkillia walli-walli ir edonna ramkek owa'ana riy doma , eneknek to'ama Yesus Nmeh ' a .
As they were coming down from the mountain , he commanded them that they should tell no one what things they had seen , until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead . ||| La'pa rwatiawua wo'ora pa rerun wa noma la ' a talla ralamni de Yesus Nano ' a re Niwra , La ' de yan memmemna mikotkot nohora hya ' a maka mimkeka re la ' a riy . Mpiei niekpa nte'ela lerni mak Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota muori owa'an la matmiati ralamni .
They kept this saying to themselves , questioning what the rising from the dead meant . ||| Pede ir edon rakot nohor memna hade la ' a riy doma , mere idma rwahu'ru ralma-riora la ida riwra , Yesus lirni Niwra , Ramori E la matmiati ralamni nnia'eratni de hya ' o ?
They asked him , saying , Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first ? ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana riwra , Hya ' a nrei pia makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re e riwra hota Elia nmai ulu nampena Ray maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar pua Namori-nalewna rimormiori Nmai ?
He said to them , Elijah indeed comes first , and restores all things . How is it written about the Son of Man , that he should suffer many things and be despised ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Plola hota Elia nmai ulu pa nwaho ' a-nwatiernia hare honona . Mere nihya ' pede ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni riwra Rimormior A'na A ' u hota Alier la kropna-krieutu , yamuki-yama'ala , nniahora-nniala ' a me rwayotlia A ' u ?
But I tell you that Elijah has come , and they have also done to him whatever they wanted to , even as it is written about him . ||| Mere A'ukot tar tiy miy . Elia nmai olekwa , ne irlernohora ir ralam wamueheni pa rhi ' yatyat e ' a , rlernohora hya ' a maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni la ' a e wawannu .
Coming to the disciples , he saw a great multitude around them , and scribes questioning them . ||| Noma Yesus Nor wutga ir wotelu rawali owa'an la riy maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re korni . Na'nama ramkek de riy harahu er walia la hande , ne makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama e rora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rawo'or nohora .
Immediately all the multitude , when they saw him , were greatly amazed , and running to him , greeted him . ||| La'pa riy rahu re ramkek nana Yesus wa dewade rheduma , noka rmahrur pua rwatroma .
He asked the scribes , What are you asking them ? ||| Dewade Yesus Natiana re , Hya ' a mak miwo'or nohora ?
One of the multitude answered , Teacher , I brought to you my son , who has a mute spirit , ||| La ' a riy woklawan de ralamni de muanke ' ida niwra , Tungkuru , a a'nu di agodia tiy O ' a , yoma hegana nhu'ru ralma pa naplinu naltieri .
and wherever it seizes him , it throws him down , and he foams at the mouth , grinds his teeth , and becomes rigid . I asked your disciples to cast it out , and they were n't able . ||| Ne la'pa hegan de nhu'ru ralma , a'nu di de nalitria pa lakweheiya la nohmarna , aparni nou-natna , nut nihini me inonni nweher wenna . Awuak olek la maka Ompuatutu-mpuaye ' a re totpa rhokar doinia hegana-kawun della mere taken niana irhokar doinia la .
He answered him , Unbelieving generation , how long shall I be with you ? How long shall I bear with you ? Bring him to me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakota Niwra , Hoi , miy mak kakleha pesiay . Hota lera wo'ir owa'an pa Agor miy tialla me Agod niohor miy , nanpena mimpiesiay A ' u ? ! Miodia keke'en de mmiai !
They brought him to him , and when he saw him , immediately the spirit convulsed him and he fell on the ground , wallowing and foaming at the mouth . ||| Noma rodi keke'en de . La'pa hegan de namkek nan Yesus dewade , plet pa nkarwa'ga keke'en de la tani wawannu pa limni-lakni totok la wewehera , nwakloli-nwaklali , ne aparni mana nou-natna .
He asked his father , How long has it been since this has been happening to him ? He said , From childhood . ||| Noka Yesus Natiana keke'enku ' de amni niwra , Anni wo'ir olek la hadi nlernana hadina ? Wniahlani , Nlernana hadi la ' ler maka kuku ' ma'ta .
Often it has cast him both into the fire and into the water to destroy him . But if you can do anything , have compassion on us and help us . ||| Nhi'inde hegan de na'ita la ai ralamni onde la ' gera ralamni pa ntota pa nwenna . Hade pede la'pa Tuna Nodi plolli pa Mtiulan mai ami , de Mtiulan-msiayn nan ami ee !
Jesus said to him , If you can believe , all things are possible to him who believes . ||| Yesus Nakot la , Lirmu miwra , La'pa Agodi plolli ? ! Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa Nhi ' nana hya ' a-hya ' to'owa , hornama riy rpesiay E ' a .
Immediately the father of the child cried out with tears , I believe . Help my unbelief ! ||| Na'nama keke'en de amni nhaun pa niwra , Apuesiay olekwa . Mere Mtiulan la a pua a ralmu yana worwuorga mere yeher to ' a a pesia'yu naruri .
When Jesus saw that a multitude came running together , he rebuked the unclean spirit , saying to him , You mute and deaf spirit , I command you , come out of him , and never enter him again ! ||| La'pa Yesus Namkeka riy harahu rma rhopnu-rpepan wa dewade , Nhok temna hegan de Niwra , Hega'nu na maka khi ' riy pa rhatilu-rhamanu , Aghopnu , mhuargot la la keke'en di , ne yan muwali owa'an la ralamni !
After crying out and convulsing him greatly , it came out of him . The boy became like one dead , so much that most of them said , He is dead . ||| Noka hegan de nhaunu-nhaunu me nkahyoi-nkada'ala nan memna keke'en de na'nama nlergot la ralamni . Keke'en de , tamkek de emek mati , nhi'nande riy rahu riwra , Nmati olekwa !
But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him up , and he arose . ||| Mere Yesus Nte'la la keke'enku ' de limni pa namata , dewade nmeh ' a naprir wia .
When he had come into the house , his disciples asked him privately , Why could n't we cast it out ? ||| La'pa Yesus ed olek la roma nayanni , ne maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmeh ' a rora , dewade ratiana riwra , Tuna , hya ' nrei piede taken niana amhokar doinia hegana-kawun della ?
He said to them , This kind can come out by nothing but by prayer and fasting . ||| Nwahla re Niwra , Eneknek to'ama msiumbaini plein , nanpena mliernana plolli-mneheni pa mhiokar doinia hegana-kawnu mak emkadi .
They went out from there and passed through Galilee . He did n't want anyone to know it , ||| Yesus Nora maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwaran la hande pa rlola Galilea lowanni , ne Yesus Nahmena riy rat niohora eda de ,
for he was teaching his disciples , and said to them , The Son of Man is being handed over to the hands of men , and they will kill him , and when he is killed , on the third day he will rise again . ||| yoma entepartarlia wniatutu-wniaye'ela maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re . Nakot la re , Rimormiori A'nani A ' die , hota ral A lia rimormiori limni ralamni . Ne rwen A ' u mere hota Amuori owa'an la matmiati ralamni , la ' a lera wotellu .
But they did n't understand the saying , and were afraid to ask him . ||| Mere maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re edonna rna'erit nana Yesus Nakotkota re . Ne ir nek de ramta'at wali pia edonna ratian la ' a-maiya Yesus ralma-riorni .
He came to Capernaum , and when he was in the house he asked them , What were you arguing among yourselves on the way ? ||| La ' noka Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai lia leta Kapernaum . La'pa Yesus ed olek la roma ralamni , dewade Natian nohora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , Hya ' a maka miwo'or nohora la talla letgarni dena ?
But they were silent , for they had disputed with one another on the way about who was the greatest . ||| Mere ir edon rwahla E lirni yoma la ' a talan letgar de rawo'or nohora he ' ed maka inponni narehi lia ir mutnu ralamni .
He sat down and called the twelve , and he said to them , If any man wants to be first , he shall be last of all , and servant of all . ||| Noma Yesus Namtatna na'nama Npol wutu maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani woru re pa Nakot la re , He ' mak katu klol yawa me natu nhima-nre ' a e rimormior wialli ed maka inpon rehia la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
He took a little child and set him in the middle of them . Taking him in his arms , he said to them , ||| Noma Yesus Ntorreri keke'enku ' ida limni na'nama Nala pa ntutrier lia ir honona gaini ralamni , nhor nioka Nkorreri keke'enku ' de pa Nakot la re ,
Whoever receives one such little child in my name receives me , and whoever receives me , does n't receive me , but him who sent me . ||| Hyal miy re , hota he ' mak kreiniana-ka'nana keke'enku ' a emeka hadi onnila A rerie'yu de emekwalima nreinian olek A wua . Ne la hameni mak kreiniana A ' u , de emekwalima nreinian olek walia Uplerlawna mak khopn A ' u .
John said to him , Teacher , we saw someone who does n't follow us casting out demons in your name , and we forbade him , because he does n't follow us . ||| Yohansi Niwra , Tungkurga , ami e mamkeka riy ida nhokra hegana-kawnu , de e nwet la Tuna nanni pede ami e mlarna de yoma it mutwualli atia ' a hade .
But Jesus said , Do n't forbid him , for there is no one who will do a mighty work in my name and be able quickly to speak evil of me . ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Yana mliarna de , yoma hameni mak khi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona , de e rwet la A na'nu edonna plet pa rwaldioinia pa napolu-naliella A na'nu .
For whoever is not against us is on our side . ||| Yoma hameni mak edonna khoklira-kpah ' a wawa la ita de nnia'eratni de ir er maka ktulan la ita .
For whoever will give you a cup of water to drink in my name because you are Christ 's , most certainly I tell you , he will in no way lose his reward . ||| Mhioratreri , plolli pa he ' a nala gera pa miy miemnu totpa natihliutu-nawriena aran miy onnila miy di de maklernohor Kristus , hota nlernan memna siewni-kaini la ' a Uplerlawna .
Whoever will cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble , it would be better for him if he were thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around his neck . ||| He ' ed mak kariei pia riy mak kakleha weli emeknekama keke'enku ' di pa edonna rpesiay owa'an mai A ' u , de Uplerlawna niukamnu la ' riy de nareh dioin meman la'pa riy rkohg watga werwerta id la e tiernu totpa ratepar wenna la hletan lawna .
If your hand causes you to stumble , cut it off . It is better for you to enter into life maimed , rather than having your two hands to go into Gehenna , into the unquenchable fire , ‘ where their worm does n't die , and the fire is not quenched . ' ||| La'pa limmi ed mak kodi miy lia do ' a-hala de mdieul dioinia la . Yanpa miodi limmi rora re pa rnakulta'ru la ai mormiori ralamni maka ta'eni rwarum nana me oranni mak kden hande mana edonna nmati . Samomuounu de miod lim memehemi pa mior tiemna Uplerlawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
If your foot causes you to stumble , cut it off . It is better for you to enter into life lame , rather than having your two feet to be cast into Gehenna , into the fire that will never be quenched- ||| La'pa lakmi ed mak kodi miy lia do ' a-hala de mdieul dioinia la . Yanpa miodi lakmi re rora pa rnakulta'ru la ai mormiori ralamni . Samomuounu de miod lak memehemi pa mior tieman Uplerlawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
‘ where their worm does n't die , and the fire is not quenched . ' ||| Yoma ai mormiori die ta'eni rwarum nana me oranni mak kden hande mana edonna nmati .
If your eye causes you to stumble , throw it out . It is better for you to enter into God 's Kingdom with one eye , rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire , ||| Ne la'pa miy matmi ed mak kariei pia mlier la do ' a-hala ralamni de mkiopil doinia . Yanpa matmi rora tetema pa rnaklia miy lia ai mormiori ralamni . Samomuounu de miod nieka matmi id pa mior tieman la Uplerlawna la lodanni-hairni . Yoma ,
‘ where their worm does n't die , and the fire is not quenched . ' ||| Ai mormior die ta'eni rwarum nana me oranni mak kden hande mana edonna nmati .
For everyone will be salted with fire , and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt . ||| Rima-rima de rala ai ra rakio ' a .
Salt is good , but if the salt has lost its saltiness , with what will you season it ? Have salt in yourselves , and be at peace with one another . ||| Kio ' de plola pa samoga , mere la'pa kio ' de edonna nmahana , de ta'en niana ra'itr owa'ana ha mahanni toh ? ! La ' mormiormi ralamni de mhi ' a-myapia de emolmolan nekama kio ' a , me yana idma nawo'or nohor ida .
He arose from there and came into the borders of Judea and beyond the Jordan . Multitudes came together to him again . As he usually did , he was again teaching them . ||| La'pa Yesus Nwahaur pa nhorwua noma Nwatitin la leta Kapernaum de pa Nla'awa noha Yudea , me la ' gerlawna Yordan walli . Ne la ' hande mana riy rahu rmai tiemna , ne emekwali yehwa ululu de Nwatutg owa'an ira .
Pharisees came to him testing him , and asked him , Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife ? ||| Noma riy Parisi rmai lia hande pa rtota-rwudia . Ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , la'pa muanke ' a ida nhopliala hawni patke ' a de , lol tatra me edonna ?
He answered , What did Moses command you ? ||| Mere Nwahla Niwra , Hya ' ed maka Musa ne'er taru-ntatar targa tiy miy ?
They said , Moses allowed a certificate of divorce to be written , and to divorce her . ||| Rwahla riwra , Musa nwayow nohor pa tsi ' a horta yapie'era la hawa patke ' a maka it tahmen doinia la .
But Jesus said to them , For your hardness of heart , he wrote you this commandment . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Onnila o'ta tehrami lawan rehi nreiniande Musa nhorat taru nnie'era-tniatar de tiy miy .
But from the beginning of the creation , God made them male and female . ||| Mere la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayapi nohkerna E ' ed maka khi ' a-kyap niana rimormiori , de muanke ' a nora patke ' a .
For this cause a man will leave his father and mother , and will join to his wife , ||| La hade pede hota a'na muanke ' a ida naltarga inni-amni pa la nora hawni patke ' a rla ' wutg ida
and the two will become one flesh , so that they are no longer two , but one flesh . ||| totpa rla ' ihyida-ralmida . Nhi'nande hare de riy worg atia ' a , mere riy id to ' a .
What therefore God has joined together , let no man separate . ||| La hade pede la ' a patke ' a rora muanke ' a maka Uplerlawna Nwatiehra oleka , de yan memmemna riy ida ntota pa nreiyapie'era .
In the house , his disciples asked him again about the same matter . ||| La'pa ira rmai lia roma nayanni , dewade maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratian wali Yesus la ' a mak kapie'er la mehlima-marya ' a .
He said to them , Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , La'pa muanke ' ida nhopliala hawni de pa nla nora patke ' a id owa'an rmehlima , enhi ' do ' a-hala la hawni patke ' a de , yoma nhopliala hawni patke ' de emeknekama nalira-naliai lia Uplerlawna yamkekni .
If a woman herself divorces her husband and marries another , she commits adultery . ||| Ne la'pa patke ' ida nhopliala hawni muanke ' a pa nla nora muanke ' a dom to ' id owa'ana rmehlima , hade de yalira-yaliai lia Uplerlawna yamkekni .
They were bringing to him little children , that he should touch them , but the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them . ||| Doma rmai die rodia upni-a'nani la Yesus totpena Nran limni pa na Nhilpai-nmanatga re , mere maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rawenan la re .
But when Jesus saw it , he was moved with indignation and said to them , Allow the little children to come to me ! Do n't forbid them , for God 's Kingdom belongs to such as these . ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek nana hihi'ini re dewade Nawenna pa Nakot la re , Miolin doinia keke'enku ' a re pa rmai A ' die . Yana mpiayotlia re , yoma riy mak edon katulu-kapetna inonni mere plet pa rpesiay pia emeknekama keke'enku ' a re er maka Uplerlawna Nwaliria pa rler teman la riy mak kmormior lia E tnioranni-riautnu ralamni .
Most certainly I tell you , whoever will not receive God 's Kingdom like a little child , he will in no way enter into it . ||| Mhioratreria , riy maka edonna kpesiay Uplerlawna pa emeknekama keke'enku ' a rpesiay , de hota edonna rler wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu .
He took them in his arms and blessed them , laying his hands on them . ||| Noma Yesus Nkolla keke'enku ' a re , na'nama Nran limni la wawannu re pa na Nhilpai-nmanatga .
As he was going out into the way , one ran to him , knelt before him , and asked him , Good Teacher , what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life ? ||| Ler maka Yesus Nwaran pa Nodi liarni la yala'ani de , riy ida nawlar niohora pa nwatroma , na'nama nwaltior la gaini ralamni pa natiana niwra , Am tungkurga , mak kalwiedweda O ' a ! Hota aghi ' a hya ' totpena aliernana mormiori-dardiaria plalahwa pa nodi liarni ?
Jesus said to him , Why do you call me good ? No one is good except one-God . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hya ' a nrei piede omhuari lirmu mai A die muiwra A ' di de riy kalwied id A ' u ? Riy honona edonna rkalwieda , eneknek to'ama Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a nanpena Nkalwiedweda .
You know the commandments , ‘ Do not murder , ' ‘ Do not commit adultery , ' ‘ Do not steal , ' ‘ Do not give false testimony , ' ‘ Do not defraud , ' ‘ Honor your father and mother . ' ||| Ne orgahamu muat niohora Uplerlawna riorni-liaini deullu-tatarni niwra , Yana mpunu-mpuenna , yana mulira-muliai , yana mkiamnelu-mkiamna ' a , yana muod niana riy mak khala , ne mputra-mpalka , muatu mu'unni-mumta'ata inmu-ammu .
He said to him , Teacher , I have observed all these things from my youth . ||| Noma riy de nakot la Yesus niwra , Tungkuru , maka Mukot taru honona re de aliernohora momuog oleka la ' a adien ma'ta la tuwari-laweru lewatni la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' ler di .
Jesus looking at him loved him , and said to him , One thing you lack . Go , sell whatever you have and give to the poor , and you will have treasure in heaven , and come , follow me , taking up the cross . ||| Yesus Namkek tertehra riy de ne Nsaynia . Nakot la , Hyalia , id edama pa yana mhuoratdoinia . Hota mlia'awa pa mu'ol dioin momuoga re'emu-tniarmu pa muala welli kupna-kai la ' a riy mak kakleha-kaplara , a'na ri'ini patyatni , ne hota omliernana re ' a-tniaru la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mhi ' hare honona nanpena ma mliernohor reri A ' u .
But his face fell at that saying , and he went away sorrowful , for he was one who had great possessions . ||| Mere la'pa riy de natlin nana lira-tunu re dewade gaini nwahra pa nla'awa de ralamni nmolu-nhelam doin la , yoma re'eni-tniarnu harahu rehia .
Jesus looked around and said to his disciples , How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter into God 's Kingdom ! ||| Yesus Namkek la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a mak kdella walli-walli re na'nama Nhar lirni la re Niwra , Riy mak kre ' a-ktaru riwra rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , de rler la yawuhi-yawe'et lawna .
The disciples were amazed at his words . But Jesus answered again , Children , how hard it is for those who trust in riches to enter into God 's Kingdom ! ||| Maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rheduma yoma lirni de . Mere Yesus Nakot owa'ana , U'pu-a'nu miy re , riy mak kha'ar aranni la ' a re ' a-tniaru riwra rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , de rler la yawuhi-yawe'et lawna .
It is easier for a camel to go through a needle 's eye than for a rich man to enter into God 's Kingdom . ||| Yoma riy mak kre ' a-ktaru mak kiwa rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak Enodi plolli la emeka Ray , de hota emeknekama hayori lawna niwra nlola nhior lawra hu'ulli , mere taken niana .
They were exceedingly astonished , saying to him , Then who can be saved ? ||| La'pa maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratlin nana Yesus lirni-tunnu re yeher to ' a pa honona re rwer rer wiawni . Noma rakot la , La'pa makre ' a-ktaru re ta'en niana rla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu de hota he ' ed maka klernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de ho ' a ?
Jesus , looking at them , said , With men it is impossible , but not with God , for all things are possible with God . ||| Yesus Namkek la honona na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Ta'en niana rimormiori ramori-ralewna inonni . Mere Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa Namori-nalewna ira , yoma Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni etla pa Nhi ' nana-nyap niana hare honona .
Peter began to tell him , Behold , we have left all and have followed you . ||| Noma Petrus nhar lirni pa niwra , Matroma , a hononam di de ami e mto'or momuou lia haneknek wawannu pa ami e mlernohor O ' a !
Jesus said , Most certainly I tell you , there is no one who has left house , or brothers , or sisters , or father , or mother , or wife , or children , or land , for my sake , and for the sake of the Good News , ||| Yesus Nwahla lirni de Niwra , Mpiesiaya , la ' pa he ' ed mak kaltarga romni , nor wutga hawni-a'nani inni-amni inni-narni onde nhyi'ini , yoma la ' A rerie'yu me la ' a Kot Kalwieda rerieini
but he will receive one hundred times more now in this time , houses , brothers , sisters , mothers , children , and land , with persecutions , and in the age to come eternal life . ||| de hota riy de nlernan memna wniahlani la Uplerlawna la ' lera-mela ri . De nlernana rahu ida tni'illi la ' a romni nor wutga hawni-a'nani inni-amni inni-narni la'pa nhyi'ini , me nlernan walia yamuki-yama'ala . Ne hota la ' ler maka kmai die e nlernan walia mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But many who are first will be last , and the last first . ||| Mere hota riy mutlialawna makla ' orkotkota-ornanana onde mak kre ' a-ktaru hota rtawli'iru ne mak kakleh weli onde mak edon kre ' a-ktaru hota rala ' ul tiargho ' a .
They were on the way , going up to Jerusalem , and Jesus was going in front of them , and they were amazed , and those who followed were afraid . He again took the twelve , and began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him . ||| Noma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re e ralala ' rer pia rokru Yerusalem , ne Yesus Nala ' a la gaini . Pede maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ema rtaplelleltarga , ne riy rahu maka klelernohora pa ktawli'iru re , ramta'at wali . Ralamni owa'ana Yesus Nawoka-nale'ga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riy termida wehrani woru pa rmeh ' a la ' gen ida na'nama Nakot nohora la ' a hya ' a maka hota riy rhi ' nana la E ' a .
Behold , we are going up to Jerusalem . The Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes . They will condemn him to death , and will deliver him to the Gentiles . ||| Lirni , Mitlina ! Dodo'ondi de itsortut niana Yerusalem . Hota la hande de ra'ol Rimormiori A'na A ' die la imam-imam o'tani-matni me la ' walia makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama pa ra'anlira-remunwawa pa hota ha rukum pen A ' u . Nhor niampena ral A lia riy maka Yahudi atia ' a re .
They will mock him , spit on him , scourge him , and kill him . On the third day he will rise again . ||| Hota rhi ' A lia hamalmialia , me rakrui lia A ga'yu ralamni . Hota rliwra-rkaklia A ' u me rwen A ' u mere la'pa lera nodia wotellu , noma hota Amuori owa'an la matmiati ralamni .
James and John , the sons of Zebedee , came near to him , saying , Teacher , we want you to do for us whatever we will ask . ||| Noka Yakowsi nora Yohansi , Sebedeus a'nani re rmai tiemna Yesus pa rakot la , Tungkuru , ampak de Omhur niohora a wakwak mamni ida !
He said to them , What do you want me to do for you ? ||| Nwahla re Niwra , Hya ' ed maka mpiaka pa Aghi ' a tiy miy ?
They said to him , Grant to us that we may sit , one at your right hand and one at your left hand , in your glory . ||| Noka riwra , Mpuayow nohor pa amor O ' a mamtatan pa mhapetre'ru la geni hitita-homomarmu ralamni , totpa amlernan wali ya'uli-yawedi .
But Jesus said to them , You do n't know what you are asking . Are you able to drink the cup that I drink , and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with ? ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la re , Miy miplin niohora miy wakwakmi de . Hota miy di de mpiaran pia mitahan nana kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a maka Aliernan dena ?
They said to him , We are able . Jesus said to them , You shall indeed drink the cup that I drink , and you shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with , ||| Noma rwahla Yesus yatianni de riwra , Hota amtahan nana . Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Plola hota mlier la kropna-krieutu maka Aliernan de ,
but to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give , but for whom it has been prepared . ||| mere hota la'pa mak kamtatan la A wa'lu malwiru-malganna pa rhapet reri A ' die , A ' g edonna godi plolli pa wuet la riy meni ed mak kamtatan la gen die . Mere he ' ed mak kamtatan la geni-tien de , Uplerlawna Nwalir nian oleka hare la ' ululu .
When the ten heard it , they began to be indignant toward James and John . ||| La'pa riy mak ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re korni riy termida re ratlin Yakowsi nora Yohansi wakwakni de ralamni ramehra la riy maroro ' a re .
Jesus summoned them and said to them , You know that they who are recognized as rulers over the nations lord it over them , and their great ones exercise authority over them . ||| Hade pede Yesus Npolg awoka momuoga honona na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Hyal miy re , miatg oleka de maka ha rhoiya la o'ta-mat lalawna me mak klernana gen tiutullu maka kodi plolli la ' luwu-a'na mak kaplin niohora Uplerlawna , de rtern apitga limni-rorni .
But it shall not be so among you , but whoever wants to become great among you shall be your servant . ||| Yana mhi ' a nhioli-liet mak emkare . Mpialdioinia de , la'pa he ' mak kiwra klernana gen tiutullu , talanni , de nhoi-ntania rimormior wialli pa emeknekama hopopna ida nhoi-ntania matromni .
Whoever of you wants to become first among you shall be bondservant of all . ||| Ne la riy mak kiwra kala ' ul miy , de nwahyar tialan pa rimormior wialli rlola pa emolmolan nekama ata-wa'ara ida nhi ' a la matromni .
For the Son of Man also came not to be served but to serve , and to give his life as a ransom for many . ||| Yoma Rimormiori A'na A ' u nek de Amuai die A wniaro'ru totpa edonna rhoi-rtani A ' u , mere Amuai die ghoi-tiania rimormiori , me gal ino'nu emeka tniuwu-nhiaiya pa A'ulewna rimormiori harahu mak kwatiawua hairi-hairi honona .
They came to Jericho . As he went out from Jericho with his disciples and a great multitude , the son of Timaeus , Bartimaeus , a blind beggar , was sitting by the road . ||| Noma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ralala ' a pa rte'ela leta Yeriko , de riy rahu lidna-tauru . La'pa rwaran la Yeriko , de riy ida mak matni kyata e namtatan pa nmeh ' a nawakwaka la talla aratni . Riy di de , nanni Bartimeus , Timeus a'nani .
When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene , he began to cry out and say , Jesus , you son of David , have mercy on me ! ||| La'pa natlin nana riy mak kmai , de Yesus mak kwatiawua Nasaret , dewade mak matni kyat de nhaun pa niwra , Yesus , Ray Daud upni-a'nani ne ! Mtiulla-msiayn nan a ' g ee !
Many rebuked him , that he should be quiet , but he cried out much more , You son of David , have mercy on me ! ||| Riy harahu mak kden la hande rawenan la riwra , Hoi ! Molmuo'lu ! Mere yeher to ' a ma narur lia nhiaunu pa niwra , Ray Daud upni-a'nani nee ! Mtiulan-msiayn nan a ' g ee !
Jesus stood still and said , Call him . They called the blind man , saying to him , Cheer up ! Get up . He is calling you ! ||| Noma Yesus Ntut tiaru na'nama Nhopan pa rla rpolga mak matni kyat de . Dewade rla rpolga riwra , Ee ! Mutetehra ralammu pa muprir pia mmuai , yoma Npolg o ' a .
He , casting away his cloak , sprang up , and came to Jesus . ||| Noka mat yat de no'lu dioinia rain plalahwani , na'nama naprir pia la nwatroma Yesus .
Jesus asked him , What do you want me to do for you ? The blind man said to him , Rabboni , that I may see again . ||| Yesus Natiana Niwra , Hya ' ed maka mpuaka mai A ' u ? Noma mat yat de nakot la Yesus Niwra , Tungkurga , awuak de a'umkek owa'ana !
Jesus said to him , Go your way . Your faith has made you well . Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus on the way . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hademkade de mlia'awa . Yoma ompuesiay A ' u pede mkialwied wa ! La ' a mtatan de nekpa matni re raphyar wia , noma riy de nlernohor reri Yesus la talla ralamni .
When they came near to Jerusalem , to Bethsphage and Bethany , at the Mount of Olives , he sent two of his disciples ||| La'pa Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhi ' pa rwakriania Yerusalem noma rlola Betfagi nora leta Betania mak kdella wo'ora Saitun hananni . Noma Yesus Nhopan pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy woru rala ' ulu
and said to them , Go your way into the village that is opposite you . Immediately as you enter into it , you will find a young donkey tied , on which no one has sat . Untie him and bring him . ||| pua rla ' a let maka ir rwakrian olek de . Yesus Nano ' a re Niwra , Hota la'pa mimtie'ela hande de hota mimkek nan memna keledai a'nani ida e nakniohu . Keledai de edonna rwatutu ma'ta nhia'ani . Ne mlieretniekla miewar doinia la pa miodia la handi .
If anyone asks you , ‘ Why are you doing this ? ' say , ‘ The Lord needs him , ' and immediately he will send him back here . ||| La'pa riy ratian miy lia hya ' a nrei pia mimpie'er doinia keledai dena ? De mikot la miwra , Itmatromlawanni e Nwaka perlu de ! Ne hota Nnairia pa nhorwua de plet pa Enhopan pa amodi mai owa'ana .
They went away , and found a young donkey tied at the door outside in the open street , and they untied him . ||| Dewade riy maroro ' a re rla'awa , la ' pa rlernana keledai trapriapi ida nakniohu lia puohra gaini walli tio'ora , la ' talla aratni . La'pa e rewar rer mia'ta keledai a'na de ,
Some of those who stood there asked them , What are you doing , untying the young donkey ? ||| noma riy dom mak ktutrier lia hande ratiana re , Hoi ! Hya ' a nrei pia mimpie'er doini keledai a'na dena ?
They said to them just as Jesus had said , and they let them go . ||| Noka rwahla re rlernohora hya ' maka Yesus Nakot targ oleka la ira . Noma riy re rollia ir pa rwe'er doini keledai de pa rodia .
They brought the young donkey to Jesus and threw their garments on it , and Jesus sat on it . ||| Nhor nioka rodia keledai della Yesus nhor nia'nama rala ir rain plalahwani ra rwowa keledai de to'orni totpena Yesus Nha ' a nana .
Many spread their garments on the way , and others were cutting down branches from the trees and spreading them on the road . ||| Riy harahu rtutga nhiu'ru-nhielma la ' a rala naniair plalahwa ra rwowa la ' talla , me korni rtuhia ora tawi-au tiawi motmota la ' a nhyi'ini pa ra re'era la talla , totpena keledai de nlola wawannu .
Those who went in front and those who followed cried out , Hosanna ! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord ! ||| Riy rahu re la'pa rlol gaini me mak ktawli'iru pa rletgar nana Yesus . Ne rhaunu-rhaun pa riwra , Ya'uli-yawedi nden rer tiy O ' ee ! Ta'uli-tawedi , tsu'ru-tselma O ' mak mai pia kodia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni !
Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is coming in the name of the Lord ! Hosanna in the highest ! ||| Ya'uli-yawedi la ray Daud upni-a'nani mak kmai pia Ntorna-nrautu ! Ta'uli-tawedi , tlilili-tmamuau Uplerlawna la tutullu-lolo'oni !
Jesus entered into the temple in Jerusalem . When he had looked around at everything , it being now evening , he went out to Bethany with the twelve . ||| La ' pa rte'ela Yerusalem dewade Yesus Nla'awa la Uplerlawna roma kreini . La ' hande de Nlili-nloh momuoga , mere yoma lera nhi'pa nmel wa de Nlergot pa Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani woru re rokru leta Betania .
The next day , when they had come out from Bethany , he was hungry . ||| La'pa repar wa noma Yesus Nor mutwualli re rhoitio'or la leta Betania pa rla'awa dewade Yesus Naplar olek wa .
Seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves , he came to see if perhaps he might find anything on it . When he came to it , he found nothing but leaves , for it was not the season for figs . ||| Noma Yesus Ndella oliet pa Namkek nana kar ona ida mak katawi olek wa , noma Nla Nwahak wo'oni pa Na'ana , mere kar on de nakleh wo ' a . Mere tawni mamaini yoma kar wo ' a lerni edon ntut ma'ta .
Jesus told it , May no one ever eat fruit from you again ! and his disciples heard it . ||| Noma Yesus Nhar lirni la kar on de Niwra , Dodo'ondi mkieran wa pa hota omukleh wo ' owa'an wa ! Ne maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re mana e ratlin reria .
They came to Jerusalem , and Jesus entered into the temple and began to throw out those who sold and those who bought in the temple , and overthrew the money changers ' tables and the seats of those who sold the doves . ||| La'pa rte'ela la ' a Yerusalem noma Yesus Nla'awa Uplerlawna roma kreini herni-gaini na'nama Nhokra-nlaiya mak ka'olu-kala ' a kaweli-kaphar la hande . Nte'la la mei-kader maka ha rwahernia kupna me mak ha ra'olu-rala ' a ma'nu loktieru , pa Nkowa-nwalia .
He would not allow anyone to carry a container through the temple . ||| Ne edonna Nhur dioinia riy pa rodia yohya ' maka ha ra'olga pa rleret lia Uplerlawna roma kreini herni-gaini .
He taught , saying to them , Is n't it written , ‘ My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations ' ? But you have made it a den of robbers ! ||| Noma Nakot la mak ka'olu-kala ' a kaweli-kaphara re Niwra , Edon miat niohora hya ' maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni la ' a Uplerlawna lirni ? ! De Niwra , Hota rweta A ro'mu de roma sniumbain geni la ' a noha-rai honona la ' a nohkerna-rai miaran di . Mere miy e mhi ' a la roma kamnelu-kamna ' geni !
The chief priests and the scribes heard it , and sought how they might destroy him . For they feared him , because all the multitude was astonished at his teaching . ||| Imam-imam o'tani-matni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ratlin nan hade dewade rahak talan pa rwenna Yesus , yoma ramta'at E ' a , onnila ramkeka riy rahu e rwer rer wiawni la E wniatutnu de .
When evening came , he went out of the city . ||| Lera la nhelma dewade Yesus Nor wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwaran la let de .
As they passed by in the morning , they saw the fig tree withered away from the roots . ||| Repardoin de Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ralala ' reri de ramkek de kar on de nkern olekwa , nla meman la ga'arni .
Peter , remembering , said to him , Rabbi , look ! The fig tree which you cursed has withered away . ||| Noma Petrus nhoratnana Yesus Nlokar oleka kar on de , noka nakot la Yesus , Tungkuru mumkek la kar on maka Mliokar de nmati olekwa .
Jesus answered them , Have faith in God . ||| Yesus Nakot la re , Miy pesiaymi narur lia Uplerlawna !
For most certainly I tell you , whoever may tell this mountain , ‘ Be taken up and cast into the sea , ' and does n't doubt in his heart , but believes that what he says is happening , he shall have whatever he says . ||| Mhioratreria , he ' nakot to'ola wo'or di pa nwarei lia tah ' i lawna hota narinin la ' tah ' i lawna ralamni , hornama pesiayni edonna nwalera mere npesiay toto ' a .
Therefore I tell you , all things whatever you pray and ask for , believe that you have received them , and you shall have them . ||| Mhioratreria ! Hya ' to ' pa mimpiaka la ' a miy sniumbainmi de hota mimliernana , hornama pesiaymi de yana nwalera .
Whenever you stand praying , forgive , if you have anything against anyone , so that your Father , who is in heaven , may also forgive you your transgressions . ||| Ne la'pa msiumbaini , de mhioratdoini riy do'oni-halli , hihi'ini-yapyapni tiy miy , totpa Ammi mak kdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha mana Namou-nawitna do'omi-halmi .
But if you do not forgive , neither will your Father in heaven forgive your transgressions . ||| Mere la'pa miy edon mhioratdoinia rira do'oni-halli tiy miy die , Amlawanmi mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha mana edonna Namou-nawitna do'omi-halmi .
They came again to Jerusalem , and as he was walking in the temple , the chief priests , the scribes , and the elders came to him , ||| Noka Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a rte ' owa'an la Yerusalem . La'pa Yesus Nalala ' a la Uplerlawna romni herni-gaini dewade , imam-imam o'tani-matni re me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama , ror wutga Yahudi in letni-am letni rmai pia
and they began saying to him , By what authority do you do these things ? Or who gave you this authority to do these things ? ||| ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , he ' ed mak ktemna plola-mneh della O limmu ralamni pede Omhi ' nan hihi'imu-yapyapmu rena ?
Jesus said to them , I will ask you one question . Answer me , and I will tell you by what authority I do these things . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni re Niwra , A ' g e giwra utian tek miy la'pa mimpiet nana , de hota Awuahla miy , de la ' a he ' a plolli pede Aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi re .
The baptism of John-was it from heaven , or from men ? Answer me . ||| Pede A'utian tek miy , de hota Yohansi makharani de ha nlernana plol della he ' a ? Uplerlawna onde rimormiori ?
They reasoned with themselves , saying , If we should say , ‘ From heaven , ' he will say , ‘ Why then did you not believe him ? ' ||| Dewade honona re rwahu'ru ralma-riora wamueh ' a pa riwra , La'pa itwet la Uplerlawna ed mak kala plolli la Yohansi de hota Eniwra , Ne hya ' a nrei pia miy edonna mpiesiay e ' a ?
If we should say , ‘ From men'-they feared the people , for all held John to really be a prophet . ||| Mere yana it twet la tiwra , Rimormiori plolli-mneheni hade . Rakot emkade yoma ramta'at rer lia rirahu yoma honona rpesiaya de Yohansi de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id hade .
They answered Jesus , We do n't know . Jesus said to them , Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things . ||| Pede honona rla ' lir id pa rwahla Yesus riwra , Ami e maplinga . Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hade emkade , de A ' muana edonna ukot wahyaria tiy miy la ' a he ' a mak kala plolli mai A ' pua Aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi re .
He began to speak to them in parables . A man planted a vineyard , put a hedge around it , dug a pit for the wine press , built a tower , rented it out to a farmer , and went into another country . ||| Noka Yesus Nwahaur la imam o'tani-matni , makwatutu deulu-tatra , ror wutga ina-ama leta re Nnairia lira yawalliohora . Niwra , Ornoha ida nawuli-natniamin anggur wo ' a la nhyi'ini-tlunanni ralamni . Nteman riwta la nhyi ' de walli-walli . Ne nahia hu'ula maka rahmi anggur turnu la ralamni . Nhor nia'nama nariria yatiak geni . Nwahi ' a pa nhorwua noma nala nhyi'-tlunni anggur della riy rtimnia . Ne nla nalaun la riy ornoha .
When it was time , he sent a servant to the farmer to get from the farmer his share of the fruit of the vineyard . ||| La'pa ntutu la lerni-melli pa riwra rreiki-rwo'or wa noma ora nhyi ' de nhopna e hopopanni-li'irnu id pa nmai pia na'ala ora nhyi ' a nhiakarni la timanni-daharni .
They took him , beat him , and sent him away empty . ||| Mere mak ktimni-kdahara re rwaldioin targho ' pa rtorna ora nhyi ' a hopopanni-li'irnu de , rwanalga me rhopan pa nawal die nhapirteum nan to ' a .
Again , he sent another servant to them , and they threw stones at him , wounded him in the head , and sent him away shamefully treated . ||| Noma ora nhyi ' de nhopn owa'ana hopopanni id owa'ana . Mere emkade walia rliwra-rkaklia o'tani na'nama rahe ' i-ramalia .
Again he sent another , and they killed him , and many others , beating some , and killing some . ||| Noma ora nhyi'-tlunni de na'enyat owa'ana hopopanni id to ' pa nmai owa'ana , ne riy di mana rwenan nana . Ne korni mana harahu wali , dom de rliwra-rkaklia , dom de rwunu-rwenna .
Therefore still having one , his beloved son , he sent him last to them , saying , ‘ They will respect my son . ' ||| Korkorni de tre ' ma'ta to ' a a'na mak nsayn memna o'ta wat memeheni . Dewade ora nhyi'-tlunni de nhopna e a'nani yoma la ' a wniarorni de , Matialo'onamde ha rhu'ru-rhelma a a'nu .
But those farmers said among themselves , ‘ This is the heir . Come , let 's kill him , and the inheritance will be ours . ' ||| Mere mak ktimni-kdahara re idma nakot la ida riwra , Maka hota kodi plolli la ononni e inhatti ! Mai pia itatuinia aranni totpena hota nhyi ' a-tlunan di it gahani !
They took him , killed him , and cast him out of the vineyard . ||| Dewade rtorna riy de na'nama rwenna pa rnaklia la nhyi ' de to'orni .
What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do ? He will come and destroy the farmers , and will give the vineyard to others . ||| Noma Yesus Natiana la mak katlina re Niwra , Nah ! La'pa ora nhyi ' de nawal pia nmai de hota hya ' ed maka ha nhi ' a la maktimni-makdahara reno ? Hota nma nhapartikil nohora re ne hota nwenna re , totpena nal to ' a la riy doma rtimnia .
Have n't you even read this Scripture , ‘ The stone which the builders rejected was made the head of the corner . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Miy edonna mpiaik ma'ta la maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni la ' a wat muaka ha rtot nohora la Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar dena ? ! De niwra , Wat muaka tukna edonna rnair nana pa rhi ' a roma-lewu , mere rhopliala , de Uplerlawna Nnairi oleka pa Nhi ' a la watu liar pianulu .
This was from the Lord . It is marvelous in our eyes ' ? ||| Hadi ed mak Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhi ' a . Adoh ha samounu nee !
They tried to seize him , but they feared the multitude , for they perceived that he spoke the parable against them . They left him and went away . ||| Yahudi o'tani-matni rat niohora la yawalliohora maka Yesus Nakota de , de Enakot nohor ira , pede rwahak talan pa rtorna Yesus . Mere ramta'at rer lia ' rirahu pede rhoitio'or doin la Yesus pa rla'awa .
They sent some of the Pharisees and the Herodians to him , that they might trap him with words . ||| Nhorwua noma rhopna Parisi dom ror wutga riy mak kher lia Herodes dom totpa rla ' a rna'aili Yesus .
When they had come , they asked him , Teacher , we know that you are honest , and do n't defer to anyone , for you are n't partial to anyone , but truly teach the way of God . Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar , or not ? Shall we give , or shall we not give ? But he , knowing their hypocrisy , said to them , Why do you test me ? Bring me a denarius , that I may see it . ||| Rmai pia ratiana riwra , Tungkurga , amatga de riy plele'er id O ' a . O ' edonna Mhue'du nan etia riy ralma-riorni , yoma riy lalawna onde riy kuku'uni ho'mana O ' edon Mpuadan nohora . Mere O ' e Mpuatut die , Mukot nohor plollolli la Uplerlawna ralma-rior kalwiedwedni la ' a rimormiori . La ' hade pede Mukot teka la mai ami , de la O wniarormu de , la ' it agamni deullu-tatarni de nakot am pia ampairia blastena la ' a mak ktorna horta-hairi Romawi Kaisar onde yana ? Mere Yesus Nat niohora irtutga inon emeka riy mak samomuou mere plollolli de riy yatyat ira pede Nakot la re , Hya ' a nrei pia miwra mtiot A ' u ? ! Mi'al tek la kupan dinar id pa A'umkek teka !
They brought it . He said to them , Whose is this image and inscription ? They said to him , Caesar 's . ||| Dewade rala kupan pi'ra id pa rtutga la Yesus . Noma Yesus Natiana re , La kupan de he ' a herni-gaini me he ' nanni mak kden la kupan dena ? Noma rwet la riwra , Ray mak ktorna horta-hairi Romawi Kaisar o'tani inhat ee !
Jesus answered them , Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar 's , and to God the things that are God 's . They marveled greatly at him . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Hade emkade , miala kupan maka ray herni-gaini etla de la ' a ray , yoma hanni hade . Ne miala la Uplerlawna hya ' maka Uplerlawna gahani wali . La'pa ratlin nana lira wniahla re honona , de honona rwer rer wiawni .
Some Sadducees , who say that there is no resurrection , came to him . They asked him , saying , ||| Noma Saduki riy doma rmai pia ratian nohora Yesus la ' a emkameni la riy mak kmati hota rmori owa'ana , yoma Saduki re er mak edonna kpesiaya riy mak kmati hota rmori owa'ana .
Teacher , Moses wrote to us , ‘ If a man 's brother dies and leaves a wife behind him , and leaves no children , that his brother should take his wife and raise up offspring for his brother . ' ||| Riwra , Tungkurga , Musa e nhorat targa mai ita , de emkadilla , La'pa muanke ' ida nmati mere nakleh ma'ta a'na , de muanke ' a mak kmat die hyalli nor owa'an yerni patyat de rmehlima , totpena rlernana hyalli mak kmati olek de duratni-waitni .
There were seven brothers . The first took a wife , and dying left no offspring . ||| Mere la ' lera ida , de muanke ' a riy wo'itu rwahyal riaralma . Noma yanulu nmehlima , mere edonna nlernan ma'ta a'na , ne nmat wia .
The second took her , and died , leaving no children behind him . The third likewise , and the seven took her and left no children . Last of all the woman also died . ||| Noma garni mak klernohor hyalli nora yerni rmehlima mere edonna nlernan wal mia'ta a'na noma nmati owa'ana . La'pa emkade walli la ' a hyalli re korni re ror owa'an yerni de rmehlima mere id mana nakleh ma'ta a'na de rmat wia pa emkade mamain pa nodi liarni pa la ntutu mueman la gari hoho ' a . La'awa hohoni noma pat de mana nmat wia , mere nakleh etia a'na ida .
In the resurrection , when they rise , whose wife will she be of them ? For the seven had her as a wife . ||| Hota la'pa la'awa lerni pa mak kmati honona rmori owa'ana , de hota he ' hawni patke ' a dena ? Yoma mak kwahyali re wo'itu meman pa rora pat de rmehlima .
Jesus answered them , Is n't this because you are mistaken , not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God ? ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla yatianni re Niwra , Oi , miy wniarormi de nhala , yoma miplin niohora Puka lirni , me miplin wualia Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni .
For when they will rise from the dead , they neither marry nor are given in marriage , but are like angels in heaven . ||| Yoma riy mak kmati re hota rmori owa'ana , de hota edonna rmehlima , mere hota rmori-rdar lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha , emolmolan nekama Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikat la ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha mak edon rmehlima .
But about the dead , that they are raised , have n't you read in the book of Moses about the Bush , how God spoke to him , saying , ‘ I am the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob ' ? ||| Nah , la ' a miy wniarormi de mak miwra riy hota edon rmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni , de emeknekama miy edonna mpiaik nan ma'ta Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni maka Musa nhorat taru , maka enatlin nana la ' ler maka nlernan ai la ' a pu'na-kiarti ralamni de . Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni emkadi , A ' di de Abraham , Isak me Yakop Uplerlawna ma'ta A ' u . Nakot emkade kennama Abraham , Isak me Yakopa rmati olekwa .
He is not the God of the dead , but of the living . You are therefore badly mistaken . ||| Ha nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka kmati rmori owa'ana me Uplerlawna de ir Uplerlawanni . Uplerlawan de , riy mak kmati Uplerlawanni atia ' a hade . E de de , mak kmormiori Uplerlawanni E ' a . Pede miy wniarormi de nhal toto ' a .
One of the scribes came and heard them questioning together , and knowing that he had answered them well , asked him , Which commandment is the greatest of all ? ||| Noma tungkurga agama ida maka kmai pia natlin nana Yesus nora Saduki mniotni rawahla lira , ne nat niohora Yesus Nala wniahlani naplollol meman la riy re , dewade natiana Yesus niwra , Tungkurga , lira nhiopan meni ed maka khi ' ononni la ' a agama deullu-tatarni ?
Jesus answered , The greatest is , ‘ Hear , Israel , the Lord our God , the Lord is one . ||| Yesus Nwahla , Lira nhiopna , nhiedu tniehra ononni inhat de emkadi , Mitlina , Israel mniotni miy , Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu id to ' a . Enekneka E ' a makla ' it Matromni .
You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart , with all your soul , with all your mind , and with all your strength . ' This is the first commandment . ||| Miala miy rurmi-laimi , ralma-riormi , ihrami-ralammi tetema pa mhima-mrie ' a Uplerlawna Matromlawanmi de .
The second is like this , ‘ You shall love your neighbor as yourself . ' There is no other commandment greater than these . ||| La ' wornu de emkadi , de niwra , Miatu mtiulla-msiaynia mira ' a-mipal wualia rimormiori wialmi pa emekwalima mimkek rer lia inon wamuehemi . Lira nhiopna dom de edon rarehia lira nhiopna ri .
The scribe said to him , Truly , teacher , you have said well that he is one , and there is none other but he , ||| Noka makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama de nakot la Yesus , Plollolli hade Tungkuru , lirmu de plola , Uplerlawna de ida Nmeh ' a to ' a . Enekneka E ' a makla ' it Matromni .
and to love him with all the heart , with all the understanding , all the soul , and with all the strength , and to love his neighbor as himself , is more important than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices . ||| Ne plola pa itala it rurni-laini , ralma-riorni , ihranu-ralamni tetema pa tsima-tre ' a Uplerlawna it Matromlawanni de , me tatu ttulla-tsaynia , tara ' a-tapal wualia it rimormior wialli pa emekwalima itamkek rer lia it inon wamueheni . Itsi ' a hade de narehi-nalawan meman la it prehenni-maunu honona maka itiwra talla Uplerlawna .
When Jesus saw that he answered wisely , he said to him , You are not far from God 's Kingdom . No one dared ask him any question after that . ||| Yesus Nwarora riy de lira wniahlani de nodia wniarora-wnialai samomuou , noma Nakot la , O edon oliet la riy maka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la emeka ir Rayni . Ne riy id mana edonna nparan pia nhar lirni pa natiana Yesus .
Jesus responded , as he taught in the temple , How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David ? ||| Yesus Nwatut mua't la Uplerlawna roma kreini . La wniatutnu ralamni de Yesus Niwra , Hya ' a nariei pia makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re riwra Ray Makamori-Kalewan maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru , de Daud duratni-waitni hade ?
For David himself said in the Holy Spirit , ‘ The Lord said to my Lord , Sit at my right hand , until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet . ' ||| Daud nmeh ' a nek de , Uplerlawna Nhiwni Narialmua pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la Ray Makamori-Kalewan de niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot la a Matromlawnu Yesus Niwra , Muliwnu Mumtatnu la ' A wa'lu malganna , la'pa A'utowra arwalmu pa ratniowar la O nayanmu .
Therefore David himself calls him Lord , so how can he be his son ? The common people heard him gladly . ||| La'pa ray Daud nmeh ' a neka nwet la Ray Makamori-Kalewna , niwra e Matromlawanni , de nihya'pa mikota ray Daud duratni E ' a ? Riy mutlialawan re rahepur nohora yatlin la .
In his teaching he said to them , Beware of the scribes , who like to walk in long robes , and to get greetings in the marketplaces , ||| La ' a wniatutnu ralamni de Yesus Niwra , Erammi la ' a tungkurga agama re ! Nhi'inde rala ' nohora raini plalahwani totpena riy ramkek de riy mak inponni ira me ir suksukni de riy ral ir la rekna-waiti la ' a ya'olu-yala ' geni .
and to get the best seats in the synagogues and the best places at feasts , ||| Rler la Yahudi kreini-iskolli ralamni de rtota gen miak kden la gaini me la ' a he ' i-hepru la ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna , de rahak geni samomuou totpa riy ra'uli ira , nanpena ramtatna la ' hande .
those who devour widows ' houses , and for a pretense make long prayers . These will receive greater condemnation . ||| Rhi ' aplinu-aplo ' neka palpuallu , ne rwarui-rwate'la hyonni-hyanni honona . Mere rsumbain de plahwani , totpena riy rwarora riy samomuou ira . Hota riy mak emkare ed maka klernan niukum maka reh miemna la riy dom to ' a .
Jesus sat down opposite the treasury and saw how the multitude cast money into the treasury . Many who were rich cast in much . ||| Noma Yesus Namtatna pa Napal reria krei ktoparni , pa Namkek de riy rahu rkenia kupan la krei ktoparni . Namkek la mak ktar kupna-kai rala pripan narehi-nalawna .
A poor widow came and she cast in two small brass coins , which equal a quadrans coin . ||| Noma a'na riy patyata ida nmai pia nken wialia sena wor lia ' a ktopar de ralamni .
He called his disciples to himself and said to them , Most certainly I tell you , this poor widow gave more than all those who are giving into the treasury , ||| Noma Npolga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re na'nama Nakot la re , Mitlina , patyat di ed mak kenia liawanni la ' a riy honona .
for they all gave out of their abundance , but she , out of her poverty , gave all that she had to live on . ||| Yoma rirahu mak keni olekwa re narehi-nalawna yoma re'eni-tniarnu harahu . Mere patyat di de nakleha-naplara mere mak ha nala re de , eneknek hare to ' a pede nwatul nana pa nal momuoga .
As he went out of the temple , one of his disciples said to him , Teacher , see what kind of stones and what kind of buildings ! ||| La'pa Yesus Nran lakni la Uplerlawna roma kreini noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a ida nakot la , Tungkurga , Mumkek tek la Uplerlawna roma kreini de samomuounu , me watgau lawna maka ha rnairia pa rariria roma krei die !
Jesus said to him , Do you see these great buildings ? There will not be left here one stone on another , which will not be thrown down . ||| Noka Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Yowa , Uplerlawna roma kreini de inpona me naruri . Mere hya ' maka mimkeka ri , hota rweyata-rwaniawu momuoga . Wat muaka kapnidara re de hota id mana edonna nalliapar la id wawannu .
As he sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple , Peter , James , John , and Andrew asked him privately , ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nla'awa wo'ora Saitun noma Namtatna pa Napal rer lia Uplerlawna roma kreini . Dewade Petrus , Yakowsi , Yohansi me Andarias rmai pia ror Yesus rwahaur rewre'wa pa riwra ,
Tell us , when will these things be ? What is the sign that these things are all about to be fulfilled ? ||| Tuna , Mpue'er nohor tek hare , mai ami hota mowen die itamkek mak Omukota re ? Me hota hya ' ed maka tamkek ulga totpena nwagahniort it la hota lera-mela inhatta ?
Jesus , answering , began to tell them , Be careful that no one leads you astray . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mi'ererma ! Yanpa riy rhi ' aklierat miy la ' a A maimia'yu de .
For many will come in my name , saying , ‘ I am he ! ' and will lead many astray . ||| Hota rirahu rmai die rnairia A na'nu pa riwra , Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru A ' g inhatti ! Hota rirahu rpesiaya ir pa rler la klieratni .
When you hear of wars and rumors of wars , do n't be troubled . For those must happen , but the end is not yet . ||| La'pa mitlina poka hidara yetni warna me mliernana kota-de'eta de rira riwra wunu-ara e nwewr olek la noha-rai , yan mimta'ata . Yoma hota hare honona de plollola pa itamkeka me itatlina , mere noha niatni edon ntutu-nte ' ma'ta .
For nation will rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . There will be earthquakes in various places . There will be famines and troubles . These things are the beginning of birth pains . ||| Hota hairi nor hairi rawunu-rawenna , me noha-rai nora noha-rai rawo'ora . Ne hota noha nruru upkarururu lol meni-meni , me rehka-lara nwewar la noha-rai . Hare honona de tamkeka pleinia mere edon rler ma't la noha niatni . Ler maka mimkek la hare de eneknek to'ama mulaliaini , pa emekto'ama patke ' a maka apannu namehra la mulaliaini , mere lerni edon ntu'tu ma'ta pa nayor a'nani .
But watch yourselves , for they will deliver you up to councils . You will be beaten in synagogues . You will stand before rulers and kings for my sake , for a testimony to them . ||| Mi'ererma yoma hota riy mak edon kpesiay re rte'la miy pia rod miy lia mak khudi-kpara gaini . Hota rliwar miy lia ' roma-lewu maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la . Ne hota ra'it miy lia ' a riy o'ta-mat lalawna me la ' a ray-ray gaini ralamni yoma la ' A rerie'yu . Hota emkade totpena mimliernan talan pa mikot nohor Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ira .
The Good News must first be preached to all the nations . ||| Ne Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota de hota rakotkot lola pa nwewar la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni totpena noha-rai honona ratga nhor nianpena noha niata .
When they lead you away and deliver you up , do n't be anxious beforehand or premeditate what you will say , but say whatever will be given you in that hour . For it is not you who speak , but the Holy Spirit . ||| Ne la'pa rtoran nan miy pia rod miy lia watghudi lokarni , de yan memmemna ihrami rteplu yoma mpiarora hya ' maka hota miy mikota ? Mere la'pa ratian miy , mikot neka hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nal miy la ' ler de memna pa mikota . Yoma hya ' mak mikota de edon nwatiawua miy wniaror wamuehemi , mere ha nwatiawu Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
Brother will deliver up brother to death , and the father his child . Children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to death . ||| Hota la ' ler de riy rala inni-narni makpesiay A ' pua rwenna . Emkade wali ama nek de nala a'nani makpesiay pa rwenna . Me upa-a'na nek de hota edon ratlin la inni-amni makpesiay pede rala inni-amni pa riy rwunu-rwenna .
You will be hated by all men for my name 's sake , but he who endures to the end will be saved . ||| Riy la ' meni-meni to ' a hota rahankeran rer tiy miy , yoma miy mliernohor reri A ' u . Mere la'pa he ' ed maka ktorrer pitpitga pesiayni pa la ntutu-nte'ela honi , de hota nlernana mormiori-lewlewna plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But when you see the abomination of desolation , spoken of by Daniel the prophet , standing where it ought not let the reader understand , then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains , ||| La'pa mimkek nana hya ' mak khi ' akdeha-aktiahlia gen lululi la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni narieiniande Uplerlawna Nawenna de napriri-nakded la genia mak yan memmemna ha naprir lia , de miy miaka mpiaik nan hadi de mhioratreria ! Miy mak kden la Yudea miwlar lia ' wo'ora hananni .
and let him who is on the housetop not go down , nor enter in , to take anything out of his house . ||| Me maka kateni anni la likti wawannu plet pa miwlari . Yana mhioratreria hya ' mak kden la roma ralamni pa miodia .
Let him who is in the field not return back to take his cloak . ||| La'pa miy mak kden la nhyi ' ralma de yana miwali pia miala lawarmi-rayanmi la ' a roma nayanni .
But woe to those who are with child and to those who nurse babies in those days ! ||| Adoh ! La ' ler de de pat mak ka'uhu-ka'apnu , ne la ' a pat mak nuh reria a'nani re rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni .
Pray that your flight wo n't be in the winter . ||| Msiumbaini totpena yanpa miwlar liola otna-anni ralamni .
For in those days there will be oppression , such as there has not been the like from the beginning of the creation which God created until now , and never will be . ||| Yoma lera-mela mak kodi kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a , yamuki-yama'ala mak emkade , de it edon tlernan etia la ' a ler maka Uplerlawna Na'ohi-na'ara nohkerna la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' ler de . Ne la'pa itleretia de , it edon tlernan emkade owa'ana .
Unless the Lord had shortened the days , no flesh would have been saved , but for the sake of the chosen ones , whom he picked out , he shortened the days . ||| La'pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala ler de pa naplahwa de hota riy id mana edonna ntuin tar lia noha wawannu yoma rmat miomuou . Mere onnila Orgahi-Orha ' a sniayanni la E mutnu-rahanu maka Nwalir niana re to ' a , maka nhi'nande ler de edonna nodi liarni .
Then if anyone tells you , ‘ Look , here is the Christ ! ' or , ‘ Look , there ! ' do n't believe it . ||| La ' ler de la'pa riy riwra , Mai pia tamkek ee ! Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru ed olek diwa , onde dom e riwra , Ee , mimkek teka ! Ray Makamori-Kalewan de etla handelloo ! Yan mitlin la lirni re .
For false christs and false prophets will arise and will show signs and wonders , that they may lead astray , if possible , even the chosen ones . ||| Yoma hota la lera re de rirahu ralahar pa riwra ir de de Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru onde rtot inonni emeka makwohorulu-ktatrulu pa rnairia hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona pa rtutga rurni-laini totpa ra ra'ohpa-ralahara rira . Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka Enwalir niana nekane riwra rtot pa rler la klieratni .
But you watch . Behold , I have told you all things beforehand . ||| Hade pede mhioratreria ! Dodo'ondi de A'ukot oleka hari tiy miy totpena hota la'pa hare honona rtutu-rte'ewa de miy edon mlier la klieratni .
But in those days , after that oppression , the sun will be darkened , the moon will not give its light , ||| Mere la'pa ler maka riy rler la kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a de rlardoinla dewade , lera nwamuela me wolla mana nakleh lair wa .
the stars will be falling from the sky , and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken . ||| Hota wtiona mana pala tuinia . Ne mak kodi plolli la darta-lyanti mana hota nawniatiri-nawnialiakra .
Then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory . ||| La'awa ler de dewade rimormiori ramkek reria Rimormiori A'na Amuai owa'ana pa Adiella kakma wawannu , de Agodia A plo'lu-mneh ' u , A preh ' u-mka'yu mak kamehi-kayona la liplipa-kamka'mani .
Then he will send out his angels , and will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds , from the ends of the earth to the ends of the sky . ||| Hota Rimormiori A'na A die ghopan pa A hopopnu mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha rawoka-rale'ga A mu'tu-rah ' u maka Uplerlawna Nwalir nian oleka de , mak kdella noha uhunu ewatni-lyanti nayanni .
Now from the fig tree , learn this parable . When the branch has now become tender and produces its leaves , you know that the summer is near , ||| Mia'ala wniatutu-wniaye ' a la kar on de . La'pa mtiamnia olli demade nmor wia , de miatg oleka lerwarnu nwakrian wia .
even so you also , when you see these things coming to pass , know that it is near , at the doors . ||| Hota emkade wal lia mimkeka hare honona mak A'ukot nohor olek diwa , de miatg oleka de lerni-melli nhi ' pa nwakrian wia .
Most certainly I say to you , this generation will not pass away until all these things happen . ||| Totpa miatga ! Riy la ' a tuwu di de edon rmat mia'ta , de hare honona mak ukot nohor oleka di hota rtutu-rte'ewa . A li'ru ri raplola .
Heaven and earth will pass away , but my words will not pass away . ||| Hota lyanti nora nohkeran di mana rmolu-rhelam wa mere A li'ru-tu'nu de ndella pa nodi liarni .
But of that day or that hour no one knows-not even the angels in heaven , nor the Son , but only the Father . ||| Riy id ho'mana hota naplin niohora la ' a hya ' lera-hya ' mela Rimormioria A'na A die maimia'yu owa'ana . Uplerlawna hopopanni nekane raplinga , Uplerlawna A'nani A ' die ho'mana uplinga . Eneknek to'ama , A'mu la Ilyamou-Watyatoha nampena ed mak katga .
Watch , keep alert , and pray , for you do n't know when the time is . ||| Hade pede orahnioratmi ! Yoma miy edonna miat niohora lera-mel maka hota A maimia'yu de ntutu-nte'ewa .
It is like a man traveling to another country , having left his house and given authority to his servants , and to each one his work , and also commanded the doorkeeper to keep watch . ||| Alia'awa la ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Amuai owa'an de , emolmolla riy id nhopal la olietleta . Nto'or la romni-lewnu ne naltarga la hopopanni-lili'irnu limni ralamni , rima-rima nora kniarni . Ne nano ' taru mak katiaka nhiari totpa natiak samomuou e maimiaini .
Watch therefore , for you do n't know when the lord of the house is coming-whether at evening , or at midnight , or when the rooster crows , or in the morning , ||| Emkade walia orahnioratmi pa mimtiaka yoma miy miplin niohora ler meni pa Matrommi Nati'ila-nawal wia , la'pa lera nmel wa , edonan de mel letgara , edonan de mela nhawulla walli , edonan de yawyawar melmel ma'ta .
lest , coming suddenly , he might find you sleeping . ||| Yanpa plinu-plin pa Amuai die , Aliernana mtieparla yanina .
What I tell you , I tell all , Watch ! ||| Hya ' maka A'ukota tiy miy di , A'ukot targa la riy honona , Orahnioratmi !
It was now two days before the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread , and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might seize him by deception and kill him . ||| Tre ' ma'ta lera woru de lerlalawna Paska de la ' a ler maka Yahudi re rhoratreria ir tuini-wedni la ler maka ralewan la ' a kokohoga la ' a Mesir , me lerlalawna Yahudi maka ra'ana rot miaka edonna rnairia tgo ' a nhi ' pa nrehgor wua . Noma imam-imam o'tani-matni re rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rwahak talan pa rtorna Yesus pa rwenna la ' a wunwunamnu .
For they said , Not during the feast , because there might be a riot among the people . ||| Mere riwra , Yan memmemna rhi ' a la ' a lera maka ha riwra ramuki-rahepur la re , yoma hota lima-rora kokokna-rariarni .
While he was at Bethany , in the house of Simon the leper , as he sat at the table , a woman came having an alabaster jar of ointment of pure nard-very costly . She broke the jar and poured it over his head . ||| La'pa Yesus Nden la leta Betania , pa Na'an rerer lia ' a Simon maka ululu de klernana nnienia ulityata de genni . Noma patke ' ida nmai Yesus de , de nodia potla ida maka ha rhi ' nana la watu-watu mak welli werta , de npenpuen lia wu'ru huwua mikmikri narwastu , mak welli werwerta wali . Noka patke ' de nhi ' wah ' a potal de nurnu na'nama nwalia wu'ru della Yesus o'tani wawannu .
But there were some who were indignant among themselves , saying , Why has this ointment been wasted ? ||| Riy dom mak kden handi rawenna pa idma nakot la ida , riwra , Hya ' ed mak krei piede nhuri-nwaldioinia wu'ru mak kalweli wierwerat dena ? !
For this might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii and given to the poor . So they grumbled against her . ||| La'pa na'olga wu'ru de ho'mana nlernan kupna nareh dioin kupna-kai gaji la anni ida gahani , pa welli de hota rala la riy mak kakleha-kaplara . Dewade rpolliohor memna patke ' de onnila hihi'ini de .
But Jesus said , Leave her alone . Why do you trouble her ? She has done a good work for me . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la re , Nihya'pa mikot emkade la patke ' dina ? ! Miolin doin e ' pa nhi ' samomuou A lia dodo'ondi to ' a ,
For you always have the poor with you , and whenever you want to , you can do them good , but you will not always have me . ||| yoma A ' g edon gor miy pia nodi liarni . Mere riy makakleha-kaplara re nhi'inde e ror wutga miy totpa la ' lera-lera nekpa mtiulan la ' ira mliernohor to ' neka miy sukmi .
She has done what she could . She has anointed my body beforehand for the burying . ||| Patke ' di nhi ' nan hya ' mak samomuou mai A ' u nlernohora e rurni-laini . De enwalia wu'ru de pa na nwahi ' A ' pua rtamni A ' u .
Most certainly I tell you , wherever this Good News may be preached throughout the whole world , that which this woman has done will also be spoken of for a memorial of her . ||| Mpiesiayo , la'pa rakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la noh di wawannu uhunu-ewatni , de irakot nohor walia patke ' de hihi'ini-yapyapni totpa rira rhoratrereria e ' a .
Judas Iscariot , who was one of the twelve , went away to the chief priests , that he might deliver him to them . ||| Noma la ' riy id la ' a riy termida wehrani woru maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re de nwawa Yudas Iskariot nla imam re o'tani-matni , yoma nwaror nana nla na'olga Yesus la ira .
They , when they heard it , were glad , and promised to give him money . He sought how he might conveniently deliver him . ||| Honona re ralamni re rahepru la'pa ratlin nan edade , ne rwanel tiar pua pena rala kupan la Yudas . Noma Yudas nla nwahakhak talla emkameni pa ntorna Yesus totpena nala la Yahudi o'tani-matni re .
On the first day of unleavened bread , when they sacrificed the Passover , his disciples asked him , Where do you want us to go and prepare that you may eat the Passover ? ||| La ' a lera yanullu la lerlalawna maka Yahudi re ha ra'ana roti mak kakleha tgo ' a , ler de wal pia nhi'inde rteti-rlaiya dum a'na maka ha riwra ra'an la ' a Paska lerni de , noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , hota ampahi ' targa ya'anlawna-yemunlawna itodi itsoratreria it tuini-wedni la ' Mesir de la ' hanmeni ?
He sent two of his disciples and said to them , Go into the city , and there a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you . Follow him , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riy woru Niwra , Mlia ' pa la'pa mlier la leta ralamni , de muanke ' a ida na nodia ger kekna ida hota nwatrom nan miy . Enlol meni-meni mana mimrio ' a mliernohor reria .
and wherever he enters in , tell the master of the house , ‘ The Teacher says , Where is the guest room , where I may eat the Passover with my disciples ? ' ||| Ne mikot la orrom maka ha mtawniokur nan de miwra , A tungkur mamni Natian o ' a la ' a gen mieni ed mak rwahi ' targ olek pa Enora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rewre'wa pa ra'an yamanan Paska ?
He will himself show you a large upper room furnished and ready . Get ready for us there . ||| hota orrom de ntutga gen liawna mak kden la roma la ' heyanna , de npenpuen niohora meini-kaderni me lola-wra ' u pa nwahi ' a-nwayod tiarg oleka . Pena mpiahi ' a ya'ana mai it la ' hande .
His disciples went out , and came into the city , and found things as he had said to them , and they prepared the Passover . ||| Noma maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rora rla'awa ne la'pa irte ' tar lia letlawan de rlernana hya ' maka Yesus ha Nakotkota re ! Noma rrora rwahi ' a-rwayod tiarga ya'ana-yemnia Paska .
When it was evening he came with the twelve . ||| La'pa nmel wa , noma Yesus Nora maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani woru re rmai rewre'wa .
As they sat and were eating , Jesus said , Most certainly I tell you , one of you will betray me-he who eats with me . ||| La'pa ra'an wut lia mei wawannu dewade Yesus Nakot la re , Mpiesiayo ! Hota la ' riy id tiy miy mak ka'an wut mai A ' u hota eniwra na'olga A ' u .
They began to be sorrowful , and to ask him one by one , Surely not I ? And another said , Surely not I ? ||| La'pa ratlin nan hade de honona rmalui-rmaher doin la . Dewade rima-rima ratiana Yesus riwra , Hota a ' g edonno ?
He answered them , It is one of the twelve , he who dips with me in the dish . ||| Yesus Niwra , Riy maka hota na'olga A ' u , de riy id tiy miy termida wehrani woru miy maka kor rewre'wa A ' pua mto ' wutga roti la ' a lari niemun geni pa emeka tema raralamni nhi'inde rhi ' a .
For the Son of Man goes as it is written about him , but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed ! It would be better for that man if he had not been born . ||| Plola , hota Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota Amuati , emeknekama e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni . Mere hota la'pa he ' ed mak ka'olga Rimormior A'na de , adoh ! Riy de hota nler meman la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Samomuounu de edon ra ' a'n nan walia e ' la noh di wawannu .
As they were eating , Jesus took bread , and when he had blessed it , he broke it and gave to them , and said , Take , eat . This is my body . ||| La'pa rara'an reri noma Yesus Na'ala roti , na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna . Nhor nioma Nhawi-nhawia rot die na'nama Nhakre'era la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re na'nama Niwra , Mia'ala pa mi'ina . Hadi de A ino'nu inhatti .
He took the cup , and when he had given thanks , he gave to them . They all drank of it . ||| Nhor nia'nama Na'ala lari maka rkeni anggur turnu na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna na'nama Nala maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , ne honona remun wut lia lar die .
He said to them , This is my blood of the new covenant , which is poured out for many . ||| Noma Nakot la re , A ra'ru inhatti maka khi ' a aplola Uplerlawna nnio ' warwuarnu me rar maka ha rhuria yoma riy liawanni rerieini .
Most certainly I tell you , I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in God 's Kingdom . ||| Mpiesiaya , hota A ' g edonna gemnia anggur turnu owa'ana la'pa nte'ela ' lerni Agemun anggur tur warwuarnu la ' a A A'mu genni maka Ntorna-nrautu emeka Ray .
When they had sung a hymn , they went out to the Mount of Olives . ||| Nhorwua noma rwahniara nhiara ya'uli-yawedi id la Uplerlawna . Nhor diewade rla'awa la ' a wo'ora Saitun .
Jesus said to them , All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight , for it is written , ‘ I will strike the shepherd , and the sheep will be scattered . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Hota miy hononmi miwlar dioinia A lia . Yoma Puka ralamni de e nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni niwra , Hota Awuenna makhuri-kwa'an de ne hota nhiuri-wnia'anni knunu-knera .
However , after I am raised up , I will go before you into Galilee . ||| Mere la'pa ramori-ralewna A ' g owa'ana de hota A ' g e ula ' ul miy lia Galilea .
But Peter said to him , Although all will be offended , yet I will not . ||| Noma Petrus nakot la Yesus , Pen neka mutu korni hota rawlar dioinia O la Tuna , mere a ' g edonna wuadur la O ' onmu .
Jesus said to him , Most certainly I tell you that you today , even this night , before the rooster crows twice , you will deny me three times . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mhuoratreria Petrusa , plollolli de la ' ler di , la ' a mel di memna hota hiwi lallu edonna nkukule ' a re'eni wor mua'ta de hota omueh ' a nekpa mrieher doin A lia ' re'eni wotelu .
But he spoke all the more , If I must die with you , I will not deny you . They all said the same thing . ||| Mere Petrus ntekal reria Niwra , La'pa it rewre'wa tler la wniunu-wnienna ho'mana hota a ' g edonna ga ' pua rieher doinia O ' a Am ee ! Ne maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re korni mana lirni emekwalima Petrus lirni .
They came to a place which was named Gethsemane . He said to his disciples , Sit here while I pray . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rla'awa geni ida mak kwawa Getsemani . La'pa rden la hande noma Enakot la ira , Mpiei pia mimtatan la handi . Pena A lia siumbaini .
He took with him Peter , James , and John , and began to be greatly troubled and distressed . ||| Noma Nakot la Petrus , Yakowsi nor Yohansi pa rmemeh ' a ror rewre'wa E ' pa rla ' a . La ' mel de Yesus ralamni Nmayo ' a-nmataw dioin la .
He said to them , My soul is exceedingly sorrowful , even to death . Stay here and watch . ||| Noma Nakot la mutwualli re Niwra , A ralmu emeka nmolu-nhelma pa emeknekama hota Amuat mie ! Mdien nek la handi pa mimatmat pa msiumbaini .
He went forward a little , and fell on the ground , and prayed that if it were possible , the hour might pass away from him . ||| Noma Yesus Nla oliet kuku ' a la ' a gen die na'nama Nler inonni pa Nwaltiora-nwaltieman la tani wawannu , na'nama Nwakwak pa la'pa Uplerlawna Nwayowa de hota E ' edon Nler la kropna-krieutu maka Uplerlawna Nwaror nan-nwalai nian oleka de .
He said , Abba , Father , all things are possible to you . Please remove this cup from me . However , not what I desire , but what you desire . ||| Niwra , Am ee ! Hadom edon ta'eni tiy O ' a . Awuak pa Muhal doinia kropna-krieutu mak hota Atiutulu-lielew niana ri . Mere yana Mliernohor maka A ralmu ha nwaka mere plolli nek tiy O'owa Ama !
He came and found them sleeping , and said to Peter , Simon , are you sleeping ? Could n't you watch one hour ? ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nawal pia Nla Ntomar la mutwualli re wotelu , mere Nla ' de wotelu e ranin hala . Noma Yesus Nakot la Simon Petrus Niwra , Simon omuninha'lu ? Eneknek to'ama jama id ho ' pa taken niana mumatar ? !
Watch and pray , that you may not enter into temptation . The spirit indeed is willing , but the flesh is weak . ||| Noma Nakot la ir honona Niwra , Mimatmat pa msiumbaini totpena yana hegana amlawanni nreh nian miy pia mlier la do ' a-hala ralamni . Yoma plolli pa miy miwra mliernohor A ralma-rio'ru mere ta'en niana mhi ' nana .
Again he went away and prayed , saying the same words . ||| Noma Yesus Nla Nsumbaini owa'ana pa lirni la Amni de emeka dodo'on de wali .
Again he returned and found them sleeping , for their eyes were very heavy , and they did n't know what to answer him . ||| Noma Yesus Nawali owa'an pa nla ntomar la mutwualli re wotelu mere e rtepartar yanina yoma matni werat rehia . La'pa ramata de raplin niohora rala lira hya ' a la ralla rwahla Yesus lirni .
He came the third time and said to them , Sleep on now , and take your rest . It is enough . The hour has come . Behold , the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nla ' owa'an pa Nmai re'eni wotelu , na'nama Nakot la mutwualli re Niwra , Minin ma'ta miy ? ! Hadella wa ! Nte'ela lerni wa pa Rimormiori A'na A ' die ra'olga A lia riy maka khi ' do ' a-hala .
Arise ! Let 's get going . Behold , he who betrays me is at hand . ||| Mimata , mai pia tla ' pa twatroma riy mak ka'olga A ' u , nmai wia dee !
Immediately , while he was still speaking , Judas , one of the twelve , came-and with him a multitude with swords and clubs , from the chief priests , the scribes , and the elders . ||| La'pa Yesus Ntepartar mua'ta la yaltieri , dewade plinu-plinnianama Yudas maka nhi'inde kre'ela maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a la riy termida wehrani woru re , enmai wia , de nor wutga mutu ida , de rodia wehla plalahwa , me aukakaklu . Imam o'tani-matni re ror wutga makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama me ina-ama leta Yahudi er mak khopan pa mutu rmai pia rtorna Yesus .
Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign , saying , Whomever I will kiss , that is he . Seize him , and lead him away safely . ||| Me Yudas mana Nakot targ oleka la mutnu re hota hya ' ed maka ha nhi ' a , niwra , Mitlina , tla ' de , de la'pa hameni ed maka akinnia de E ' inhatta pa mtiorna la'pa miodia de mitiaktiak reria !
When he had come , immediately he came to him and said , Rabbi ! Rabbi ! and kissed him . ||| Pa la'pa rte'ela gen die , dewade Yudas nod tiemna Yesus pa nakot la , Tungkurga ! Dewade nkinnia Yesus .
They laid their hands on him and seized him . ||| Dewade riy mutlialawna re rma rwarui Yesus pa rtorna .
But a certain one of those who stood by drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest , and cut off his ear . ||| Noma Yesus mutwualli ida mak ktutrier lia hande nleh dioinia wehlani pa ndawar doinia riy ida tlinni . Riy de nhi ' hopopna la imam-imam re o'ta lawanni .
Jesus answered them , Have you come out , as against a robber , with swords and clubs to seize me ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la riy mutlialawna re Niwra , Hoi hya ' nrei pia miodia wehla ara me kakaklu re pa ma mtiorn A ' u ? ! Yanpa la ' miy wniarormi de A ' di de riy yatyata-halala id A ' u ? !
I was daily with you in the temple teaching , and you did n't arrest me . But this is so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled . ||| La ' lera-ler nek de A ' g e gor miy pia it rewre'wa la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini , de A ' g e wuatutu-wuaye ' miy , mere miy edonna mtiorn A ' u . Mere ha rhi ' emkade totpa naplol nohor la Puka lirni .
They all left him , and fled . ||| Nhor nioma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re honona rawlar dioin E ' pa kni'ini-kniewarni .
A certain young man followed him , having a linen cloth thrown around himself over his naked body . The young men grabbed him , ||| La ler de tuwgari ida e nlernohor reri Yesus , de nnair nan to ' a kok lenan ananni id pa nahewu inonni . Riy maka rodi wehla-kakaklu re rtota pa rtoran nana ,
but he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked . ||| mere naul doinia kok della pa natliawih pia nawlar wia .
They led Jesus away to the high priest . All the chief priests , the elders , and the scribes came together with him . ||| Noma rodia Yesus pa rla ' a la imam-imam o'ta lawanni gaini . Ne imam-imam o'tani-matni ror wut nieka ina-ama Yahudi me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re rawok momuou wal lia hande .
Peter had followed him from a distance , until he came into the court of the high priest . He was sitting with the officers , and warming himself in the light of the fire . ||| Petrus de nlernohor reria Yesus , mere edon nwakriania . Noma Petrus nwakdie'da wal pia nodi liarni la riwta ralamni la ' a imam lawna romni , pa nre ' pa namtatan wutga la ' riy mak katiak la ' hande pa nor wali ir pa namriri ai .
Now the chief priests and the whole council sought witnesses against Jesus to put him to death , and found none . ||| Imama re o'tani-matni la'pa mak ktorna agama watghudni honona , rahak riy mak kaprir niohora ira saksi totpa ralahar pa rwaghal Yesus totpena rlernan talan pa rukum penna E ' a mere o'ta-mata re edonna rlernana wniatikilgeni totpena rwaghala Yesus .
For many gave false testimony against him , and their testimony did n't agree with each other . ||| Riy harahu rmai pia rakot nohora hya ' ed maka edon kaplola , mere lirni-tunnu re idma edon nora ida ramneneha .
Some stood up and gave false testimony against him , saying , ||| Noma riy dom rtutrier pia ralahar pa rwaghal Yesus , riwra ,
We heard him say , ‘ I will destroy this temple that is made with hands , and in three days I will build another made without hands . ' ||| Amatlin nana oleka riy di Nakota Niwra hota E ' ed maka Nweye'era Uplerlawna roma kreini maka rimormiori limni enni die , me hota E Nariri krei id owa'ana la ' a lera wotellu , maka rimormiori limni enni atia ' hade .
Even so , their testimony did n't agree . ||| La ' handi mana lirni re edon ramneha .
The high priest stood up in the middle , and asked Jesus , Have you no answer ? What is it which these testify against you ? ||| Noma imam lawna naprir lia woka-le ' u die letgarni pa nakot la Yesus Niwra , Hoi , hota O edonna Mukot hadom pa Mpuahla nana lira mak kwatiawua etnu-liolli rena ? Lira re raplola me edonna ?
But he stayed quiet , and answered nothing . Again the high priest asked him , Are you the Christ , the Son of the Blessed ? ||| Mere Yesus Nherer tio'owa . Noma imam lawna nhari owa'an lirni pa niwra , O ' di de Ray Makamori-Kalewna O ' a maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru , de Uplerlawna maka ha ra'uli-rawedia A'nani ?
Jesus said , I am . You will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power , and coming with the clouds of the sky . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , A ' g e inhatti . Ne hota la ' ler id de hota mimkek memna , Rimormiori A'na A'umtatan la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kodi plolli walli malganna ne hota Amuai die Agodia kakma la ' a lyanti tutulu .
The high priest tore his clothes and said , What further need have we of witnesses ? ||| Dewade imam lawan de nawenan pa nlihira-nnaiya rain plalah wamueheni yoma nwarora de Yesus de rimormior tio ' E ' a , na'nama niwra , Yan itwei pia riy rakot nohora E halli .
You have heard the blasphemy ! What do you think ? They all condemned him to be worthy of death . ||| Miy hononmi e mitlin walia E lirni de Enapolu-naliella Uplerlawna yoma Enakot Niwra Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a toh ? ! Pa emkameni la miy ralma-riormi ? Mietlia wa . Noma honona rla ' lir id pa retlia de niukamnu mak klol talanni de totpa rwunu-rwenna .
Some began to spit on him , and to cover his face , and to beat him with fists , and to tell him , Prophesy ! The officers struck him with the palms of their hands . ||| Dewade dom de krurui-kpirpir la Yesus ne rtutwu apitga Yesus matni pa rdupla , na'nama rakot la riwra , Makwohorulu-ktatrulu O ' a , pa Mpuet tek la he ' ed maka kdupla O ' a dena ! Noma mak katiaka re mana rdupla E ' a .
As Peter was in the courtyard below , one of the maids of the high priest came , ||| Ne Petrus namtatan ma'ta la yawa , la ' a riwta ralamni la ' a imam lawna romni totpa nat niohora hota rhi ' a hya ' a la Yesus . Dewade pat mak khoi-ktani ida nmai wia .
and seeing Peter warming himself , she looked at him and said , You were also with the Nazarene , Jesus ! ||| La'pa namkek nana Petrus namriri ai noma namkek tertehra na'nama nakot la niwra , Nhi'inde omuor wutga riy mak kor Yesus riy Nasaret de mila ' wutu .
But he denied it , saying , I neither know nor understand what you are saying . He went out on the porch , and the rooster crowed . ||| Mere Petrus nrehera , niwra , Eee ! A ' niek de uplinu-uplo ' nohora riy de me a'uplin niohora lirmu-tunmu de lie'erni . Noma Petrus nwatitin la hande pa nla'awa riwta nhiarni onni dewade hiwi mana nkukule'ewa .
The maid saw him and began again to tell those who stood by , This is one of them . ||| Noma pat makhoi-ktani de nlol hande pa namkek owa'an Petrus dewade nakot owa'an la riy mak kden hande niwra , Emeknekama dodo'ona riy di nor walia Yesus talla .
But he again denied it . After a little while again those who stood by said to Peter , You truly are one of them , for you are a Galilean , and your speech shows it . ||| Noma Petrus nreher owa'ana . Edon nalo'on wali ne riy mak kden hande rakot la Petrus riwra , O inhatti manoo ! Yana mriehera , yoma riy Galilea id o ' a .
But he began to curse and to swear , I do n't know this man of whom you speak ! ||| Noma Petrus ntan limni la heyanan pa nlokra-nhautu niwra , Uplerlawna Namkek reria me a ' g edonna gat niohora riy maka omukotkot nohora de . Uplerlawna nhiakar lokarni mai a ' u la'pa agat niohora riy de ha lolola .
The rooster crowed the second time . Peter remembered the words that Jesus said to him , Before the rooster crows twice , you will deny me three times . When he thought about that , he wept . ||| Plinu-plinnianamde hiwi lallu nkukule ' nan re'eni wornu wa na'nam de Petrus nhioratni nko ' i nana Yesus lirni de Niwra , Hota la hiwi lallu edon nkukule ' ma'ta re'eni wornu de hota omrieher nan olek A lia re'eni wotel wua . Noma Petrus nahedge'du la kniakru .
Immediately in the morning the chief priests , with the elders , scribes , and the whole council , held a consultation , bound Jesus , carried him away , and delivered him up to Pilate . ||| Repreparrer mia'ta de , imam-imam o'tani-matni ror wutga Yahudi in letni-am letni me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama la'pa mak ktorna watghudi agama Yahudi honona re rwahu'ru lira totpena retlia Yesus wnienanni . Noma rwutga Yesus limni na'nama rodia la Pilatus .
Pilate asked him , Are you the King of the Jews ? He answered , So you say . ||| Noma Pilatus natiana Yesus Niwra , Plola O ' di de ray Yahudi id O ' a ? Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , Emek lir mak omukot de !
The chief priests accused him of many things . ||| Imama re o'tani-matni rwaghal E ' la ' a lira-tunu harahu .
Pilate again asked him , Have you no answer ? See how many things they testify against you ! ||| Pilatus natian owa'ana niwra , O ' Edonna Muala lira wniahlani ? ! Mutlin la irwaghal O'ola lira-tunu harahu .
But Jesus made no further answer , so that Pilate marveled . ||| Mere Yesus lir ta ' a-waw ta ' to'owa , pede Gubernur Pilatus de nwer rer wiawni .
Now at the feast he used to release to them one prisoner , whomever they asked of him . ||| La ' a Yahudi lerlalawanni maka ha rhoratreria tuini-wedni , Pilatus nhi'inde nolin doinia Yahudi id la ' a roma nhio'la totpena nhi ' ahepru Yahudi ralamni . Enolin doinia riy maka Yahudi mutlialawna re ha rwalir niana .
There was one called Barabbas , bound with his fellow insurgents , men who in the insurrection had committed murder . ||| Ne ler de riy ida nwawa Barabas , e rho'la wutga la riy mak kmalawna horta-hairi Romawi doma . Barabas nor talanwalli re rmalawna ray ne rwunu-rwenan riy la kokokna-rariarni id ralamni .
The multitude , crying aloud , began to ask him to do as he always did for them . ||| Noma riy rahu rmai pia rwak totpena Pilatus nolin doinia riy ida emekto ' a nhi'inde de e nhi ' taru-nyap tiarga la lerlalawan de .
Pilate answered them , saying , Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews ? ||| Pilatus natiana re , Hota miy mpiayow de agolin doinia Ray Yahudi di tiy miy ?
For he perceived that for envy the chief priests had delivered him up . ||| Pilatus natian emkare la rirahu re yoma Pilatus e nat niohora imam-imam o'tani-matni re rala Yesus la e ' a , yoma honona re ralamni ramehra la Yesus .
But the chief priests stirred up the multitude , that he should release Barabbas to them instead . ||| Mere imama re o'tani-matni rtekal rer tio ' la totpena rirahu rwak la Pilatus pa nolin doinia Barabas nek wa .
Pilate again asked them , What then should I do to him whom you call the King of the Jews ? ||| Noma Pilatus natiana niwra , Hade emkade , aghi ' a hya ' a la Yesus maka mpieta la Yahudi Rayni dina ?
They cried out again , Crucify him ! ||| Noma rhaunu pa riwra , Mpuairia la auwlakra hananni .
Pilate said to them , Why , what evil has he done ? But they cried out exceedingly , Crucify him ! ||| Noka Pilatus nakot la re , Mere halli hya ' a pede ? Noma honona re yeher to ' pa rhaunu-rhaunu riwra , Mpuairia la auwlakra hananni !
Pilate , wishing to please the multitude , released Barabbas to them , and handed over Jesus , when he had flogged him , to be crucified . ||| Noma Pilatus niwra nhi ' amikri riy rahu re ralamni pede nolin doinia Barabas la pa nala la ira , ne nhopan pa riy rliwra Yesus . Na'nama nala pa rla rwairia la auwlakra hananni .
The soldiers led him away within the court , which is the Praetorium , and they called together the whole cohort . ||| La ' noma makodi keki-rautu rodia Yesus pa rler la gubernur Pilatus romni na'nama rpolg awoka makodi keki-rautu korni re lidna-lidan pa rmai wia .
They clothed him with purple , and weaving a crown of thorns , they put it on him . ||| Rohoga emeka ray-ray naniayarni plalahwa mak ungu la Yesus . Noma rhi ' a wutu-lai ida de rnairia pu'na-kiarit ruri pa rkow nana la Yesus o'tani .
They began to salute him , Hail , King of the Jews ! ||| Nhor nioka rhaunu riwra , Mmuormiori plalahwa Ray Yahu'du ne !
They struck his head with a reed and spat on him , and bowing their knees , did homage to him . ||| Ra'ala lie'ena pa rliwar reri o'tani me rakrui-rakpira , na'nama rwaltiora-rwaltieman la gaini ralamni pa rahe ' i-ramalia Yesus .
When they had mocked him , they took the purple cloak off him , and put his own garments on him . They led him out to crucify him . ||| La'pa rahe ' i-ramalia na'nama ral doinia naniairia ungu della pa rohog owa'ana naniair wamueheni . Nhor nioma rodgiota pa rla rwairia la auwlakra . La'pa rodgiota pa rla rwairia la auwlakra .
They compelled one passing by , coming from the country , Simon of Cyrene , the father of Alexander and Rufus , to go with them that he might bear his cross . ||| de rwatrom nana riy Kirene ida , nwawa Simona , de Aleksander nora Rufus amni . La ' ler de Simon etla ' talan letgara pa niwa nla'awa la ' letlawna Yerusalem . Noma ha rhopan pa riy de nakwara Yesus auwlakarni .
They brought him to the place called Golgotha , which is , being interpreted , The place of a skull . ||| Rodia Yesus pa rla'awa gen miaka ha rweta la Golgota , nnia'eratni de , Riy Ruri-Kliaklu Genni .
They offered him wine mixed with myrrh to drink , but he did n't take it . ||| Noma rala atiaw maka ha rweta la mur , mak rawniah ' a la anggur turnu pa rala Yesus Nemnia totpena mehrani nmolu . Mere Nahmena Nemnia .
Crucifying him , they parted his garments among them , casting lots on them , what each should take . ||| Nhor nia'nama rwairia Yesus la auwlakra hananni . Na'nama rdurmu-rhakra Yesus naniayarni de rnairia patui undi totpena ratetra rima-rima nhiakarni .
It was the third hour when they crucified him . ||| Lera nha'at la jama wosiewni dewade , rwairia wa .
The superscription of his accusation was written over him , THE KING OF THE JEWS . ||| Rhorat targa la auganna ida , de rakot nohora hya ' maka Yahudi o'tani-matni re rto'on reri E halli pa rhorat de riwra , Yahudi Rayni inhatti .
With him they crucified two robbers , one on his right hand , and one on his left . ||| La ' hande wali pia e rken wialia riy wor lia auwlakra yoma rrora rpera-rdaitia deulu-tatra hairi Roma . Rkenia id la Yesus walli malganna ne id la ' a Yesus walli malwiru , ne Yesus Nden la letgara .
The Scripture was fulfilled which says , He was counted with transgressors . ||| Totpa naplola la Puka lirni mak kiwra , Ratniekame E ' de riy mak kpera-kdaiti deulu-tatra .
Those who passed by blasphemed him , wagging their heads and saying , Ha ! You who destroy the temple and build it in three days , ||| Mak klola hande rdik o'tani la me rwohora-rtatra me rahe ' i-ramal lia Yesus . Rakot la Yesus riwra , Oi ! O ' ed mak kiwra kwaye'er doinia Uplerlawna roma kreini nampena Omuriria owa'ana la ' lera wotellu .
save yourself , and come down from the cross ! ||| Muerun la auwlakar de hananni , ne Mulewna inonmu .
Likewise , also the chief priests mocking among themselves with the scribes said , He saved others . He ca n't save himself . ||| Emkade walia imama re o'tani-matni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rapolu-raliella Yesus pa idma nakot la ida riwra , E ' de Namori-nalewna riy meheni , mere inon wamueheni de takeni Nalewan nana .
Let the Christ , the King of Israel , now come down from the cross , that we may see and believe him . Those who were crucified with him also insulted him . ||| Tamkek teka hota riy di maka ha rhoiya la riy makamori-kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru , Israel Rayni de hota Nerun la auwlakar de hananni totpena tpesiaya . Riy maroro ' a re la auwlakra re ho'mana rapolu-ralielan walia Yesus la auwlakra hananni .
When the sixth hour had come , there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour . ||| La lera nwawuau ro'onni jam termida wehrani woru mere la ' a noh de tetema nekpa mel'uta-maliena nodia pa lera nher miemna jam wotellu .
At the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice , saying , Eloi , Eloi , lama sabachthani ? which is , being interpreted , My God , my God , why have you forsaken me ? ||| La'pa jama wotelu , dewade Yesus Nhaun pa Niwra , Eloi , eloi lama sabaktani ? Ha nnia'eratni de niwra , Uplerlawnu ne , Uplerlawnu ne nihya'pa Omuolin limmu-mpue'er rormu mai A ' u ?
Some of those who stood by , when they heard it , said , Behold , he is calling Elijah . ||| Riy wo'ir mak erla hande e ratlin nana Yesus lirni , na'nama riwra , Idee ! Ha e Npolga Elia .
One ran , and filling a sponge full of vinegar , put it on a reed and gave it to him to drink , saying , Let him be . Let 's see whether Elijah comes to take him down . ||| Noma riy ida nawlar pia nla na'ala kuliai , na'nama nto ' a la anggur turnu mak milmilu na'nama nkenia la au tutnu pa ntania la Yesus nurnu totpena Nemnia . Niwra , Twei pleini . Yanpa Elia nma nalernia E ' a .
Jesus cried out with a loud voice , and gave up the spirit . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nhaunu owa'an dewade Nmati wia .
The veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom . ||| Noma plinu-plinnianamde kok lawna maka ra rahew tiarga liolgeni la ' a gen mak kmou-kwitna la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni totpa riy edon rler la rialam de , ema rlihirwah ' a la ' woru la ' heyanna pa ntut mueman la yawa .
When the centurion , who stood by opposite him , saw that he cried out like this and breathed his last , he said , Truly this man was the Son of God ! ||| La ' ler de mak khi ' o'tani la lidna makodi keki-rautu rahu ida , e naprir pia napal reri Yesus . La'pa namkek nana Yesus matmiatni emkade dewade niwra , Hadi plola ! E ' de de , Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a .
There were also women watching from afar , among whom were both Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses , and Salome , ||| La ' hande de patke ' dom e ror wal pia rden nek la oliet pa e ramkek reria . La ' ir mutnu de , de Maria Magdalena , me Maria , Yakowsi mak tuwgar de me Yoses inni , nor wali Salome e rtutrieri .
who , when he was in Galilee , followed him and served him , and many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem . ||| Ir de ed maka klernohor reria Yesus la Galilea totpena ramkek la ya'anni-yemannu , rpo ' a-rpahi ' a Yesus hyonni-hyanni . Me patke ' harahu er wal lia hande mak kor rewre'wa Yesus pa rmai lia Yerusalem .
When evening had now come , because it was the Preparation Day , that is , the day before the Sabbath , ||| La ler de ntuin tar la ' ler maka rwahi ' targa hare honona pa rwei-rnara Sabat lerni ler maka Yahudi re edon rkar lia yoma repar de Sabat de ntutu-nte'ewa . Pa la'pa lera ntuini de
Joseph of Arimathaea , a prominent council member who also himself was looking for God 's Kingdom , came . He boldly went in to Pilate , and asked for Jesus ' body . ||| noma riy id la hande de nanni Yusup nhi ' parani inonni pa nla nwak la Pilatus totpena na'ala Yesus inonni mak kmati olek de . Yusup de riy mak kwatiawua leta Arimatea , maka nhi'inde nre ' wal pia nla ' a riy mak ketlia lira-tunu la agama hanni , ne riy maka ha rwetwet la nanni . Nhi'inde ralamni nod rer lia wniei la Uplerlawna hota Ntorna-nrautu emeka Ray .
Pilate was surprised to hear that he was already dead , and summoning the centurion , he asked him whether he had been dead long . ||| Pilatus nwer rer wiawni la'pa natlin nana Yesus Nmati olekwa . Noma npolga makodi keki-rautu o'tani de pa natiana de plollolli de Yesus Nmati olekwa me edonna ?
When he found out from the centurion , he granted the body to Joseph . ||| La'pa natlin nana makodi keki-rautu o'tani lirni niwra Yesus Nmati olek wa , dewade nwayow pa nala mat diella Yusup .
He bought a linen cloth , and taking him down , wound him in the linen cloth and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of a rock . He rolled a stone against the door of the tomb . ||| Yusup la nawelia kok lawan wawahra mak kamnurnuhru nhor nia'nama nla nalernia Yesus mak kmati olek della la ' a auwlakra hananni . Na'nama nala kok lawan wawahra mak kamnurnuhru na ntomna . Nhor nia'nama nla nle'er targa la ' a liena maka ha rawte'ta nande . Nhor nia'nama nwaklol tiarga wat liawna id pa na nherit targa lien de nhiarni .
Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses , saw where he was laid . ||| Maria Magdalena me Maria , Yoses inni , ramkek nohora nle'er targa Yesus la ' hoi-kietra meni ralamni .
When the Sabbath was past , Mary Magdalene , and Mary the mother of James , and Salome bought spices , that they might come and anoint him . ||| La'pa Sabat lerni nlardoinla dewade Maria Magdalena nor wutga Maria , Yakowsi inni , me Salome pa rla rawelia wu'ru mikmikri lamliamni pa rodia la lien maka ha rkenia Yesus inonni totpa ralla rawu'ru Yesus inonni .
Very early on the first day of the week , they came to the tomb when the sun had risen . ||| La'pa yawyawar ma'ta la krei lerni , de lera matni ri'ini npah ' a nana dewade a'na patke ' a re rla ' a Yesus hoini . La ' a talla ralamni de
They were saying among themselves , Who will roll away the stone from the door of the tomb for us ? ||| idma nakot la ida , Hota he ' ed maka kwaklol dioini wat liawna maka ralla rherit targa hoi de nhiarni mai ita ?
for it was very big . Looking up , they saw that the stone was rolled back . ||| Mere la ' pa rwakriania hoi die onni dewade ramkek de wat liawan maka ha ra rherit targa hoi die nhiarni ema rwaklol dioin oleka wa .
Entering into the tomb , they saw a young man sitting on the right side , dressed in a white robe , and they were amazed . ||| Noka rler la hoi de ralamni , ramkeka tuwgari ida nnairi rain wawahra plalahwa pa e namtatna la walli malganna , nhi'nande rheduma .
He said to them , Do n't be amazed . You seek Jesus , the Nazarene , who has been crucified . He has risen ! He is not here . See the place where they laid him ! ||| Mere tuwgar die nakot la patke ' a re niwra , Yan mimta'ata . Miy mia mihaka Yesus makden Nasaret , maka ha rwairia me inonni nmat lia auwlakra hananni . Ha Nmori olekwa pa edonna Nden olek la handi wa . In miy re , mimkek tek la gen miaka ha retar targa Yesus inonni de .
But go , tell his disciples and Peter , ‘ He goes before you into Galilee . There you will see him , as he said to you . ' ||| Pena mlia ' pa mikot nohora la Petrus me e mutwualli korni maka nhi'inde Yesus Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , miwra , Hota Yesus Nala ' ul miy lia Galilea totpena miora mpiatrom la hande , nlernohora hya ' maka Enakot targa tiy miy .
They went out , and fled from the tomb , for trembling and astonishment had come on them . They said nothing to anyone , for they were afraid . ||| Noma patke ' a re rlergot wa pa rawlar pia rto'or doinia hoi diella , de ramta'at wenna pa honona rdiwra-rda'ala me ralamni worwuorga . Edon rakot eti hya ' a-hya ' a la he'-he ' a , yoma ramta'at wenna la hya ' a maka ramkek nana .
Now when he had risen early on the first day of the week , he appeared first to Mary Magdalene , from whom he had cast out seven demons . ||| La'pa Yesus Nmori owa'an olekwa la ' pa yawyawar ma'ta la krei lerni de , noma Nala ' ul pua Ntutga inonni la Maria Magdalena , maka la ' ler ululu de Yesus Natargota hegana wo'it lia ralamni .
She went and told those who had been with him , as they mourned and wept . ||| Noka patke ' de nla nwahaur nohora la maka klelernohor reri Yesus . Hare de ertepartarlia kniakru me yaluli-yahona .
When they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her , they disbelieved . ||| Mere la'pa ratlin nana de , Yesus Nmori owa'ana ne patke ' de namkek nan oleka de , edonna rpesiaya .
After these things he was revealed in another form to two of them as they walked , on their way into the country . ||| Noma Yesus Ntutga inonni la maklernohor reri E ' a riy woru la ' ler maka ralala ' rer lia leta-leta to'orni re , Nherun doinia gaini la .
They went away and told it to the rest . They did n't believe them , either . ||| Noma rawal pia rwahaur nohora la mutwualli re korni , mere mutwualli re mana edonna rpesiaya .
Afterward he was revealed to the eleven themselves as they sat at the table , and he rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart , because they did n't believe those who had seen him after he had risen . ||| Nhor nioka Entutga gaini la maka Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani ida re de , e rara'an reri , noka Npolliohora yoma rakleha pesiay me ralamni re tehrani pede rahmena rpesiaya riy maka kamkek ulga E ' a la'pa Nmori owa'ana la matmiatni ralamni , de lirni .
He said to them , Go into all the world and preach the Good News to the whole creation . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Mlia'awa la nohkerkeran di uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani pa mikot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni dilla rimormiori honona .
He who believes and is baptized will be saved , but he who disbelieves will be condemned . ||| He ' ed maka kpesiaya pa rharania de , hota nler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa , mere he ' maka edonna kpesiaya de nlernana matmiati plalahwa la ' a ai mormiori ralamni .
These signs will accompany those who believe , in my name they will cast out demons , they will speak with new languages , ||| Riy maka kpesiaya de hota rhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , de hota rala A na'nu rahokra hegana-kawnu , ne raltier die rnairia yawala maka riy raplinga .
they will take up serpents , and if they drink any deadly thing , it will in no way hurt them , they will lay hands on the sick , and they will recover . ||| Hota rte'la la niy mere edon nhi ' hadoma , ne la'pa ra'an nana-remun nana ya'an molmuolu-yemun matmiati ho'mana edon nhi ' hadoma mere naprir rer mia'ta . Hota rtan limni la mak kamehra-kamau wawannu de rkalwied wa .
So then the Lord , after he had spoken to them , was received up into heaven and sat down at the right hand of God . ||| La'pa Itmatromni Yesus Naltier lia pa nhorwua dewade , ema rran nana pa Nokru Ilyamou-Watyatoha , la'pa Namtatan la Uplerlawna walli malganna .
They went out and preached everywhere , the Lord working with them and confirming the word by the signs that followed . Amen . ||| Nhor nia'nama maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rla rwe'er nohora Orgahi lirni la nohkerkeran di uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani , ne Orgahi mana Ntulan wutu-Nkar wiut lia ira , ne Nala ruri-lai lia ira pa rhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona totpena Nhi ' aplola E lirni .
Since many have undertaken to set in order a narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled among us , even as those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and servants of the word delivered them to us , ||| Topilsu , maka agatu ghu'ru-ghelma . Riy rahu rhorat targ oleka Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni maka Enhi ' nan la a letgar mamni . Rhorat de rlernohora hya ' maka ami makpesiay die matlin nan olekwa la ' a riy mak kamkek memna Yesus hihi'ini la mulaliaini me rakot nohora E lirni-tunnu .
it seemed good to me also , having traced the course of all things accurately from the first , to write to you in order , most excellent Theophilus , ||| Pa a ' muana awuarora de hota samoga pa aghi ' wali horta pa ga ukot nohor kalwiedweda hare honona la ' Tuna , yoma a'utiana prorowta memna hare honona ndella onni pa la ntut lia hohoni , pede dodo'ondi de agat niohor memna .
that you might know the certainty concerning the things in which you were instructed . ||| Pede agiwa ghi ' a horat di , totpena la ' a hya ' maka ha rwatutu-rwaye ' olek la Tuna , la ' a Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni , de dodo'ondi de Tuna nat niohor memna ha raplol momuou .
There was in the days of Herod , the king of Judea , a certain priest named Zacharias , of the priestly division of Abijah . He had a wife of the daughters of Aaron , and her name was Elizabeth . ||| Tuna , la ' lerni la Herodes Nhi ' ray lia Yudea , de makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la rimormiori rerieini de imam ida nwawa Sakaria . Enkar wut lia la imam-imam re maka ha rweta la Abia tatarwalli golongan . Patke'eni nanni Elisabeta ne Elisabet mana Harun de imam mak kala ' ul muemna de duratni-waitni id e ' a .
They were both righteous before God , walking blamelessly in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord . ||| Irrora mormiorni-dardiarni de naplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , yoma irrora ratu rhu'ru-rhelam ratlina-rataili la Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni-tunnu me deullu-tatarni .
But they had no child , because Elizabeth was barren , and they both were well advanced in years . ||| Mere irrora rakleh a'na yoma Elisabeta nkerna , ne rrora rhamto ' a-rhape'ewa .
Now while he executed the priest 's office before God in the order of his division ||| La ' lera ida ne , maka ha rweta la Abia tatarwalli golongan rlernana nhiakra yatiaka , noma Sakaria nala ' a kniarni de emeknekama makpolu-makwaka la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni .
according to the custom of the priest 's office , his lot was to enter into the temple of the Lord and burn incense . ||| La ' ler de imam-imam re rhedga patui cabut undi totpa rwalir niana he ' ed mak hota ktutnia ayalin la Orgahi-Orha ' a roma kreini ralamni pa emeknekama nhi'inde ha rhi ' a de . Noma Sakaria nlernana .
The whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense . ||| Pa la ' pa ntepartarlia ntutnia ayalin la rialam de , ne riy rahu e rsumbain la pliorni .
An angel of the Lord appeared to him , standing on the right side of the altar of incense . ||| Noka plinu-plinnianama Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni ntutu gaini la Sakaria . Hopopan de ntutrier lia katri'ana maka ha rtutnia ayalin la de , walli malganna .
Zacharias was troubled when he saw him , and fear fell upon him . ||| La'pa Sakaria namkek nana hopopan de , dewade nhedum pa namta'at wenna .
But the angel said to him , Do n't be afraid , Zacharias , because your request has been heard . Your wife , Elizabeth , will bear you a son , and you shall call his name John . ||| Mere hopopan de nakot la niwra , Hei ! Sakaria yan mumta'ata ! Uplerlawna e Natlin oleka o sniumbainmu . Hota o patke'emu Elisabeta nmor nian a'na muanke ' a ida , ne mual nanni de Yohansi .
You will have joy and gladness , and many will rejoice at his birth . ||| Hota omumuki-muhepur toto ' meman nohora de , ne la'pa rmoria de riy rahu hota rahepur nohor walia .
For he will be great in the sight of the Lord , and he will drink no wine nor strong drink . He will be filled with the Holy Spirit , even from his mother 's womb . ||| Yoma hota la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a yamkekni , de a'namu de nla ' a riy orkotkota-ornanan ida . Hota yan memmemna nemnia anggur turnu onde arka . Ne hota Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la e ' a , la ' meman la ' ler maka ha rmor nian memna e ' a .
He will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God . ||| Ne hota Israel mutnu liawanni ratlina-ratailla e lirni-tunnu pa rapali owa'an la Uplerlawna , ira Matromlawanni dee !
He will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah , ‘ to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , ' and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just , to prepare a people prepared for the Lord . ||| Hota nlernohora makwohorulu-ktatrulu nabi Elia yehwani la ' ler delloo ! Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Naruri-nalai nian e ' a . Pa hota enala ' ul pua nwalipra-nwahyaria Orgahi-Orha ' a talanni totpena Israel rimormiorni re rwahi ' targa la Orgahi-Orha ' a maimiaini . De e ' ed maka khi ' a pa riy maka kor inni-amni onde upni-a'nani rahuri-rawo'ora hota rkalwied owa'ana . Ne riy mak edonna katlina-katailla Orgahi-Orha ' a de Enwatut pua ratu ratlina-ratail owa'an la Orgahi-Orha ' a , pa emeknekama riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Zacharias said to the angel , How can I be sure of this ? For I am an old man , and my wife is well advanced in years . ||| Sakaria nakot la hopopan de niwra , Hota emkameni la agat memna hya ' mak omukot de naplola ? Yoma aghamtoto'owa ne pa'tu mana nhape'ewa .
The angel answered him , I am Gabriel , who stands in the presence of God . I was sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news . ||| Noma Uplerlawna hopopanni de nwahla lirni niwra , A ' di de Gabriel a ' u . A ' g ed maka khi ' hopopan la Uplerlawna . A ' g ed mak khima-kre ' melayani memn E ' a la ' gen tutullu-lolo'oni . Me E ' ed maka khopn a ' pua agodia kot kalwied dilla mai o ' a .
Behold , you will be silent and not able to speak until the day that these things will happen , because you did n't believe my words , which will be fulfilled in their proper time . ||| Mhuoratreria ! Hota ompual lia mak khakamu yoma o ' edonna mpuesiay a li'ru . La'pa nte'ela lerni maka Uplerlawna Nakot targa pa a li'ru ri ntutu-nte'ewa , nanpena multieri owa'ana .
The people were waiting for Zacharias , and they marveled that he delayed in the temple . ||| La'pa palo'on ho ' a mana riy rtepartarlia wniei Sakaria . Honona re rwarora riwra , Sakaria mahnek rehia la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni . Nihya'pa emkadeno ?
When he came out , he could not speak to them . They perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple . He continued making signs to them , and remained mute . ||| Ne la'pa nlergot wa de ta'en niana nakot hadomdom la ' mak kwei re . Mere nal to ' limni na nawal hatilu . Yoma nwali olek la mak khakamu . La'pa ramkek emkade noma ratg oleka Sakaria , de matni ri'ini npah ' a nan hadom la ' a krei ralamni .
When the days of his service were fulfilled , he departed to his house . ||| La'pa yatiakni nhorwua la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni noma Sakaria nawali owa'an la e romni nayanni .
After these days Elizabeth his wife conceived , and she hid herself five months , saying , ||| La'pa edon nalo'on wali ne hawni Elisabet na'apnu , dewade edonna nlergot nana wolla wolim la roma nayanni .
Thus has the Lord done to me in the days in which he looked at me , to take away my reproach among men . ||| Noma niwra , Hota la'awa hohoni di , de Orgahi-Orha ' a Ntutga ralam kalwiedni pa Ntulan la mai a ' u yoma Nhi ' a pua a ' u ' a'na pede a ' g edonna muola-mua ' a owa'an la ' a rira gaini ralamni .
Now in the sixth month , the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth , ||| La'pa lerni la Elisabeta na'apun wa , ne la'pa wolanni wonem pa noma Uplerlawna Nhopan pa hopopanni Gabriel nla ' a Nasaret , let mak kden la Galilea nohoni .
to a virgin pledged to be married to a man whose name was Joseph , of David 's house . The virgin 's name was Mary . ||| Nhopan doinia Gabriel nmaiya hararara mak kwawa Maria mak kor Yusup , ray Daud duratni-waitni , de ranyah ' a tar oleka . Ra'an lira-remun waw pa hota rmehlima , mere Maria edon nor muanke ' id mana rawok ma'ta la yaninni .
Having come in , the angel said to her , Rejoice , you highly favored one ! The Lord is with you . Blessed are you among women ! ||| Hopopan de nma nakot la Maria niwra , Maria ee ! Kalwiedo ! Orgahi-Orha ' a Nara ' a-napa'lu ne hota E Nor o ' talla !
But when she saw him , she was greatly troubled at the saying , and considered what kind of salutation this might be . ||| La'pa natlin nana hopopan de lirni dewade Maria ralamni worwuorga pa nwaror la ' a-mai lia ihranu ralamni niwra , Ha wniak kalwiedni de nnia'eratni emkamenio ?
The angel said to her , Do n't be afraid , Mary , for you have found favor with God . ||| Noma hopopan de nakot la niwra , Yan mumta'ata Maria , yoma Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napa'lu !
Behold , you will conceive in your womb and give birth to a son , and shall name him ‘ Jesus . ' ||| Hota omu'uhu-mu'apun nana a'na muanke ' a ida , ne muala pa nanni Yesus .
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High . The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David , ||| Hota nwal lia riy lalawna ida , ne hota rweta la Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni A'nani . Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu hota Nhi ' E ' pa Nla ' Ray , pa emekwalima E upni-tgarni ray Daud .
and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever . There will be no end to his Kingdom . ||| Me hota plol toto ' a pa Enodi plolli la ' a Israel duratni-waitni pa nodia liarni .
Mary said to the angel , How can this be , seeing I am a virgin ? ||| Noma Maria nakot la Uplerlawna hopopanni de niwra , Mere , a ' g edon gor ma'ta muanke ' a ida manin wutu pa hota emkameni pede a ' u ' a'na ?
The angel answered her , The Holy Spirit will come on you , and the power of the Most High will overshadow you . Therefore also the holy one who is born from you will be called the Son of God . ||| Noma hopopan de nakot la niwra , Hota Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nmai tiemn o ' de . Ne Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni plolli-mneheni hota nwewarna'nu . La ' hade pede hota papay miaka mu'uhu-mu'apun de rweta la Uplerlawna A'nani . Ne hota Enakleha do ' a-hala .
Behold , Elizabeth your relative also has conceived a son in her old age , and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren . ||| Mhoratreria ! Hota Elisabet , elmu mak nhape ' olek de , na'apn olek pa wolanni wonem pa. E ' ed maka ha riwra nkeran pa nakleh a'na mere hota nayori a'na .
For nothing spoken by God is impossible . ||| Yoma hadoma edonna ta'enia la Uplerlawna .
Mary said , Behold , the servant of the Lord , let it be done to me according to your word . Then the angel departed from her . ||| Noma Maria nakot la niwra , A ' di de Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni a ' pua nden nek la Uplerlawna lirni mak omukota re . Noma Uplerlawna hopopanni de nhoitio'or la Maria pa nla'awa .
Mary arose in those days and went into the hill country with haste , into a city of Judah , ||| Noma Maria nwahi ' a-nwayodia pa nhorwua noma pleta-plet pa nokria leta ida mak kden la Yudea , la ' a gen miaka kden la wo'ora hananni .
and entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth . ||| Nla ' noma nokria Sakaria romni pa nwak kalwieda la elli Elisabet .
When Elizabeth heard Mary 's greeting , the baby leaped in her womb , and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit . ||| Ne la'pa Elisabet natlin tutga Maria wniak kalwiedni dewade papay mak kden la Elisabet apannu ralamni de nlekru hmuakmuakru . Dewade Elisabeta ihranu ralamni npenpuen olek la Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
She called out with a loud voice and said , Blessed are you among women , and blessed is the fruit of your womb ! ||| Noma Elisabet nhar lirni pa niwra , O ' di de mlier la pripanni-fa'anni berkat mak karehi-kalawan la ' a maka patke ' a honona rlernana . Tertera-demdema berkat nwewar nana a'na maka ha muor nian de !
Why am I so favored , that the mother of my Lord should come to me ? ||| A ' di de he ' a ' u pede Uplerlawna Nhi ' a pua aliernan nhiu'ru-nhielam di maka a Matromlawnu inni nmai a ' diena ? !
For behold , when the voice of your greeting came into my ears , the baby leaped in my womb for joy ! ||| Agat niohora a Matromlawnu eda de la apanmu ralamni yoma la'pa utlin nana ompuak kalwieda , dewade papay mak kden la a apnu di nlekru hmuakmuakru yoma nre'ela nahepru .
Blessed is she who believed , for there will be a fulfillment of the things which have been spoken to her from the Lord ! ||| Mlier la unut lawna yoma mpiesiay oleka de maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot tiy o ' a hota nayamkeka .
Mary said , My soul magnifies the Lord . ||| Maria na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna pa niwra , A ' u'uli-uwedia O ' a Matroma .
My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior , ||| Ne a ralmu nahepuepru yoma Uplerlawna O ' a ed mak kamori-kalewn a ' u .
for he has looked at the humble state of his servant . For behold , from now on , all generations will call me blessed . ||| Yoma O ' ed mak khoratreri a ' u , hopopanmu a ' di , maka kakleha weli . La ' ler di pa hota tuwu nernu-nha'ata de hota rimormiori nohkerna wawannu riwra a ' g e lier la unut lawna .
For he who is mighty has done great things for me . Holy is his name . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kodi plola-ktaryat O ' a Mhi ' a-myap nieka hihi ' a-yapyap miaka samomuou memna mai a ' u . Nanmu nden la mounu-wahrani hitni-lomarni yoma O ' de mak kakleha do ' a-hala .
His mercy is for generations and generations on those who fear him . ||| Tuw nernu-nha'ata , mere Orgahi-Orha ' a O ' a ed mak ktutga ralam kalwiedmu la ' riy maka ka'unni-kamta'ata O ' a .
He has shown strength with his arm . He has scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts . ||| Mniairia limmu mak karuri-ka'orat de pa na Nwekapie'era riy mak katulu-kapetna .
He has put down princes from their thrones , and has exalted the lowly . ||| Mulernia ray-ray rella la ' mtatangenni mere Mrian tultulga riy mak klol yawa .
He has filled the hungry with good things . He has sent the rich away empty . ||| Omuala mak kalwiedwed la mak kakleha-kaplara , mere makre ' a-maktaru de edon rlernan hadom mere Mhuokar doinia la .
He has given help to Israel , his servant , that he might remember mercy , as he spoke to our fathers , to Abraham and his offspring forever . ||| Orgahiya , O ' edonna Mhuortaplinga hya ' ed maka Muno ' taru la makden Yahudi upni-tgarni Abraham , Isak , me Yakop . Pede Omtiutga ralam kalwiedmu la Abraham nora duratni-waitni makden Israel ami makhi ' hopopanmu-lili'irmu . Ralam kalwiedmu de nodi pa nodi liarni .
Mary stayed with her about three months , and then returned to her house . ||| Maria naltier pa nhorwua noma nden wut lia Elisabeta la'pa edon nhal de wolla wotelu nhor diewade nla'awa .
Now the time that Elizabeth should give birth was fulfilled , and she gave birth to a son . ||| Nte'ela lerni pa Elisabeta nmoria a'nani , noma nmor niana muanke ' ida .
Her neighbors and her relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy toward her , and they rejoiced with her . ||| Elisabeta rom heiwialli re ror wutga inni-narni re ratlin nana de Orgahi kalwiedni mak kreh mieman de la ' a Elisabet , noma honona re rmai pia rahepur nohora Elisabeta .
On the eighth day , they came to circumcise the child , and they would have called him Zacharias , after the name of his father . ||| La'pa keke'en de umarnu lera wo'awa noma rom heiwialli ror wutga inni-narni rmai totpena rsunta keke'eni de , noma inni-narni riwra ral nanni pa nlernohora amni Sakaria .
His mother answered , Not so , but he will be called John . ||| Mere inni nahmena niwra , Rwet neka la Yohanis wa .
They said to her , There is no one among your relatives who is called by this name . ||| Noma riy rakot la riwra , Nihya'pa emkadena ? La miy upmi-tgarmi de riy id mana edonna nwawa nan de .
They made signs to his father , what he would have him called . ||| Noma rawala hakamu lia Sakaria riwra rala hya ' nan la a'namu dina ?
He asked for a writing tablet , and wrote , His name is John . They all marveled . ||| Noma Sakaria nwaka watu-le ' g id pa nhorat la , de nhorta , Nanni de Yohansi . Honona re rwer rer wiawni .
His mouth was opened immediately and his tongue freed , and he spoke , blessing God . ||| La'pa nwet nanni la Yohansi dewade Sakaria mana lirni nawali owa'an la genni pa na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna .
Fear came on all who lived around them , and all these sayings were talked about throughout all the hill country of Judea . ||| Rom heiwialli re honona ramta'at wenna . Ne riy harahu mak kden la Yudea la wo'ora re uhunu-ewatni idma rwahaur nohor ida la ' papay die .
All who heard them laid them up in their heart , saying , What then will this child be ? The hand of the Lord was with him . ||| Riy honona rwarora la ' ralamni , riwra , Hota keke'en de lawan de la ' a hya ' o ? Yoma ramkek de Orgahi-Orha ' a e Natiak reria de !
His father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Spirit , and prophesied , saying , ||| Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la Yohansi amni Sakaria pa nwahaur nohora hya ' maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot targa la e ' a niwra ,
Blessed be the Lord , the God of Israel , for he has visited and redeemed his people , ||| Mai pia ta'uli-tawedia Orgahi-Orha ' a Israel Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu . Yoma Enmai pia Ntuwu-nhai menebus mutnu-rahanu re .
and has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David ||| Hota Nala de muanke ' ida metam keranni mak karuri-kalai pa Nma Namori-nalewn ita . E ' de Uplerlawna hopopanni Daud di'nani-lohorni duratni-waitni .
as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets who have been from of old , ||| Pa hota emekneka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nano'targ oleka la ululu memna lola makwohorulu-ktatrulu nabi maka Ha Nwalir niana pa rakot nohora re .
salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us , ||| Totpena hota Nma Namori-nalewn it la ' a ita arwalli mak ktern ita .
to show mercy toward our fathers , to remember his holy covenant , ||| Nmai pia Ntutga ralam kalwiedni la it upni-tgarni Abraham , Isak , me Yakopa yoma E ' edonna Nhortaplinga nnio ' maka Enmemeh ' a Nano'targa la ira , pa dodo'ondi de Nmai pia Nhi ' memna .
the oath which he swore to Abraham our father , ||| Nnairi liokra pa naplol nohora nnio'oni de la it amni Abrahama ,
to grant to us that we , being delivered out of the hand of our enemies , should serve him without fear , ||| de hota Nalewn it la ' a it arwalli , totpena yan tamta'ata la tsima-tre ' E ' a ,
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life . ||| totpena itwal lia E rimormiorni mak kakleha do ' a-hala me mak kden la plol wawna pa nodi liarni .
And you , child , will be called a prophet of the Most High , for you will go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways , ||| Mere la'pa Yohansi a a'nu o ' a de hota rhoi o la makwohorulu-ktatrulu makhi ' hopopna-lili'iru la ' a Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni . Yoma hota o ' e mula'ul pua mpualipra-mpuahyaria Orgahi-Orha ' a loini-talanni .
to give knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission of their sins , ||| Hota mhi ' emkade la ' a mukot nohora la E mutnu-rahanu ita , miwra hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitn it do'oni-halli , ne emkade pede hota tler la yamori-yalewna .
because of the tender mercy of our God , by which the dawn from on high will visit us , ||| Ne hota tler la yamori-yalewan de yoma it Uplerlawanni , ralam kalwiedni mak kareh mieman de mai ita . Yoma hota la ' E kalwiedni de pede hota Ray Makamori-Kalewna ida Enwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha Sorga pa Nmai pia emeknekama lera mak khitit la yawyawra .
to shine on those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death , to guide our feet into the way of peace . ||| Totpena riy mak kden la melmelli-kalkalamni me ramta'ata hota rmati , de hota rlernana lelerni . Pa hota emkade pede E ' ed mak kodia it la ' a loi-talla maka kod it pa itora Uplerlawna tkalwieda owa'ana .
The child was growing and becoming strong in spirit , and was in the desert until the day of his public appearance to Israel . ||| Sakaria naltier pa nhorwua noma la ' pa Sakaria a'nani de nlawlawan lol wa me pesiayni la ' a Uplerlawna mana narur wia , noma nmeh ' a ndel la ' a wo'orletna-kawurloini . Nden nek la ' hande pa nte'ela lerni-melli dewade ntutga rupni la ' a riy Israel re wa .
Now in those days , a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be enrolled . ||| La ' ler maka na'nam ha rmor nian Yohanis de Kaisar Agustus makhi ' ray lia lodna-hairi Romawi nakot lirni pa mak kden la Romawi lodanni-hairni totpena honona rma rakot nanni pa rhorta totpa rhor rekna momuoga kuku'uni-lalawanni honona sensus .
This was the first enrollment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria . ||| Sensus di ed mak kala ' ulu la ' ler maka Kirenius nhi ' a gubernur la ' Siria na'nama rhi ' a sensus di .
All went to enroll themselves , everyone to his own city . ||| La ' ler de de riy honona rawal lia letni-ruhunni , totpena rhorta nanni la mak ktoran leta horta hairni .
Joseph also went up from Galilee , out of the city of Nazareth , into Judea , to David 's city , which is called Bethlehem , because he was of the house and family of David , ||| Pa hota Yusup mana nden la Nasaret la ' noha Galilea pa nokria noha Yudea , pa nla ' let Betlehem maka ha rmor tiarga ray Daud , yoma Yusup nwatiawua Daud luwnu-a'nani .
to enroll himself with Mary , who was pledged to be married to him as wife , being pregnant . ||| Noma Yusup nor niah'ani Maria mak ka'apuapun rer die rmai rewre'wa pa rhorat walia nanni la hande .
While they were there , the day had come for her to give birth . ||| La'pa rdella Betlehem dewade Maria wolanni ntu'tu wa pa hota nayor wia .
She gave birth to her firstborn son . She wrapped him in bands of cloth and laid him in a feeding trough , because there was no room for them in the inn . ||| Noma nayor dioinia a'na yanullu muanke ' a ida , de nala koka na ntomna na'nama nadud tiarga la duma ya'an genni maka ha rala wewnihi ra rwowa , yoma ir edonna rlernana geni-tiena la ' geni miaka ha rpairi pa ranin la hande .
There were shepherds in the same country staying in the field , and keeping watch by night over their flock . ||| La ' mel de de makodi duma ertepartarlia yatiaka dumni re la ' a wewna wawannu mak edon olieta la Yusup nor Maria genni .
Behold , an angel of the Lord stood by them , and the glory of the Lord shone around them , and they were terrified . ||| Noma plinu-plinnianama Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni Ntutga rupni la ira , ne Orgahi-Orha ' a hitititni reprepar nana ir honona pa reiniande honona ramta'at wenna .
The angel said to them , Do n't be afraid , for behold , I bring you good news of great joy which will be to all the people . ||| Mere hopopan de nakot la re niwra , Yan mimta'ata ! Yoma a ' g e godia kot kalwiedweda id tiy miy ! Hota hadi de nodia hepuepru la riy honona .
For there is born to you today , in David 's city , a Savior , who is Christ the Lord . ||| La ' ler di de rayori oleka papay id la Daud letni leta tniet ohorni , mak kodia miy lia mormiori-lewlewna . E ' ed maka ha riwra Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru , de Itmatromni .
This is the sign to you , you will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth , lying in a feeding trough . ||| Ne hota la ' hadi pede hota miat niohora memna a li'ru ri raplola , de hota mlia ' pa mliernana papay ida de e rala koka ra rtoman targa me radud tiarga la duma ya'an geni maka ha rala wewnihi ra rwowa .
Suddenly , there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army praising God and saying , ||| Plin-plinnianamde Uplerlawna hopopanni re ema riw niana pa nor wutga hopopna mak kala ' ul die raloi lirni pa ra'uli-rawedi Uplerlawna riwra ,
Glory to God in the highest , on earth peace , good will toward men . ||| Uplerlawnu nee ! Ama'uli-mawed reri O la O genmu-tienmu la ' tutullu-lolo'oni . Hota kalwieda-paitiota la ' a nohkerna wawannu la ' a rimormiori miaka Uplerlawna ralamni nala .
When the angels went away from them into the sky , the shepherds said to one another , Let 's go to Bethlehem , now , and see this thing that has happened , which the Lord has made known to us . ||| Dewade Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu re honona rwarei lia gen die wa pa rawal lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha , noma makodi duma re idma nakot la ida riwra , Mai pia tla ' teka Betlehema pa tamkeka maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot mai ita rena !
They came with haste and found both Mary and Joseph , and the baby was lying in the feeding trough . ||| Pede honona radil doin la ririri pa rla'awa pa rla de rhor niana mdududga Maria nora Yusup me papay die maka e radud tiarga la dum ya'an gen die .
When they saw it , they publicized widely the saying which was spoken to them about this child . ||| La'pa ramkek nana papay die noma rla ' rwahaur nohora la ' riy , la ' a hya ' maka hopopna re rakota la ira la ' a ke'enku ' de .
All who heard it wondered at the things which were spoken to them by the shepherds . ||| Ne riy honona mak katlin nana de rwer rer wiawni la mak ha rwahauru re .
But Mary kept all these sayings , pondering them in her heart . ||| Mere Maria nwarora-nwalai niohora hare honona pa nwatierun targa la ihranu ralamni .
The shepherds returned , glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen , just as it was told them . ||| Noma makodi duma re honona rawal pia rla ramkek la nhiurni-wnia'anni . Ne ra'uli-rawedia rlilili-rmamuawua Uplerlawna kotni-nanni , yoma la ' a hya ' maka hopopna rakota la ira pa rla ' pa rlina-rmat ramkek meman oleka de . Hya ' maka ha ramkeka de emekwalia maka Uplerlawna hopopanni-li'irnu nakota la ' ira .
When eight days were fulfilled for the circumcision of the child , his name was called Jesus , which was given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb . ||| La'pa Yesus Nler la lera wo'awni dewade o'ta-mata krei rma rsunta . Ne inni-amni rhi ' nanni pa nwawa Yesus . Yoma nan de ed maka Uplerlawna hopopanni ha rakota la ' lera Maria edonna na'apnu ma'ta .
When the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled , they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord ||| Noma la la'pa nte'ela la ' lerni pa Yusup nor Maria rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni pa rhi ' amou-awitna inonni re la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini , pede rod walia a'nani Yesus la Yerusalem pa ral wali a'na de la Orgahi-Orha ' a la ' hande ,
as it is written in the law of the Lord , Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord , ||| pa emekneka Orgahi-Orha ' a nnio'oni maka Nakot taru la ' Musa deullu-tatarni de Eniwra , Riy honona a'na muanke ' a yanullu de ed maka rala la Orgahi-Orha ' a orgahani .
and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord , A pair of turtledoves , or two young pigeons . ||| Ir mana e riwra ral walia himima-rere ' a la Orgahi-Orha ' a la E roma kreini totpa rhi ' amou-awitna inonni rlernohora maka ha rakot targa olek la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a deullu-tatarni ralamni de niwra la'pa rhi ' amou-awitna inonni mere rakleha-raplara , hota ral neka ma'nu loktieru id nora tnialwialli , onde lmo'ma maru trapriapi woru .
Behold , there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon . This man was righteous and devout , looking for the consolation of Israel , and the Holy Spirit was on him . ||| La ' ler de wal pia riy id etla la ' Yerusalem de , nwawa Simeon . Hade ed maka nhi'inde ntutga nhiolia samomuou la rimormior wialli , me natu na'unni-namta'ata Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , deullu-tatarni , ne nwei rer niek la ' lerni-melli maka hota Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna Israel . Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nor reria talan wutu .
It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord 's Christ . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot olek la wa Niwra hota e ' edonna nmat mia'ta yoma edonna namkek ma'ta Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nano'tar die !
He came in the Spirit into the temple . When the parents brought in the child , Jesus , that they might do concerning him according to the custom of the law , ||| La ' ler de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli niodni pa Simeon nler la Uplerlawna roma kreini , dewade nwatrom tut niana Yusup nora Maria rod wialia a'nani Yesus maka lokmermer ma'ta de pa rma rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni .
then he received him into his arms and blessed God , and said , ||| Dewade Simeon na'ala keke'en de na'nama nakiria pa na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna niwra ,
Now you are releasing your servant , Master , according to your word , in peace , ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a nu ne ! Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kdella tutullu-lolo'oni mak kodi plola-ktaryatu , hya ' maka Omukottaru mai a ' u ntutu-nte'ewa , pede ndella pa hopopanmu a ' di alier la matmiati yoma a ralmu di namtiertiernu olekwa .
for my eyes have seen your salvation , ||| Yoma agal memna ma'tu olli rora pa ga umkeka riy maka Omtiutga olek pa Nma Namori-nalewna rimormiori de !
which you have prepared before the face of all peoples , ||| Makamori-Kalewan de , O ' e Mpuahi ' a-mpuayod tiarg oleka wa totpena Nma Nod tiemna luwu-a'na mak kden la lodna-hairi re honona totpa honona re ramkek nan memn E ' a .
a light for revelation to the nations , and the glory of your people Israel . ||| Pa emeknekama hulu mak kodia lelerni la Yahudi atia ' a totpena rat niohora O ' a . Ne onnila hihi'ini pede riy honona rhu'ru-rhelam la mutmu-rahamu Israel .
Joseph and his mother were marveling at the things which were spoken concerning him . ||| Keke'en de inni-amni rwer rer wiawni la ' a hya ' maka Simeon ha nakota la keke'en de riorni-liaini .
Simeon blessed them , and said to Mary , his mother , Behold , this child is appointed for the falling and the rising of many in Israel , and for a sign which is spoken against . ||| Simeon nwaka Uplerlawna totpa Nala tertera-demdema la ira , noma nakot la Maria niwra , La ' keke'en di de Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a oleka E ' pa hota la'pa nlawan oleka de , Nalernia Israel uhunu-riwni harahu dom mak kahmena rpesiaya me Israel uhunu-riwni dom de Nrana pa rwakriania Uplerlawna . Hota riy ramkek nana E hihi'ini-yapyapni onde ratlin nan E lirni mak ktutga Uplerlawna ralma-riorni mere rimormiori liawanni hota rwayotlia E ' a .
Yes , a sword will pierce through your own soul , that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed . ||| Ne hota la ' hade pede Uplerlawna Nalharia riy harahu ralma-riorni pa riy dom to ' a rat niohora ir ralma-riorni wali . Ne hota Maria , o ihramu-ralammu mana nmawal doin meman la pa emeknekama wehla ploklokra maka ha ra rteti-rlaiya pa ra rkokia la ihramu-ralammu .
There was one Anna , a prophetess , the daughter of Phanuel , of the tribe of Asher she was of a great age , having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity , ||| Me la ' hande de patke ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu id etla nhape ' olekwa , nanni Hana . Fanuel , Asyera duratni-waitni , de a'nani . Nmehlim pa mahnekni anni wo'itu mere hawni nmati .
and she had been a widow for about eighty-four years , who did n't depart from the temple , worshiping with fastings and petitions night and day . ||| Pa napatyata , me nmormior nan oleka anni terampwo'awa wehrani wogata , ne nhi'inde nhol lielera-melmel to'ola ' Uplerlawna roma kreini . Lelera-melmela de nden nek la hande pa nkola tieru-nawur nehla la Uplerlawna me natahan lara .
Coming up at that very hour , she gave thanks to the Lord , and spoke of him to all those who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem . ||| Simeon naltier pa nhorwua na'nama hape ' de nma nhuru nana harella hande , pa na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna me naltier niohor la keke'en de la ' a riy honona mak kden la hande maka rwewiei niohora hota Uplerlawna Nwe'er doin mak kden Israel re la ' a wutwutu-kokgohu .
When they had accomplished all things that were according to the law of the Lord , they returned into Galilee , to their own city , Nazareth . ||| La'pa Yusup nor Maria rhi ' ahorga deulu-tatra Orgahi-Orha ' a hanni , noma rawal lia Nasaret , ir let wamueheni de la Galilea lowanni .
The child was growing , and was becoming strong in spirit , being filled with wisdom , and the grace of God was upon him . ||| Keke'en de na'ititar rer lia liawanni nora rurni-laini , me la ' wniarora-wnialai samomuounu , ne Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napalga !
His parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover . ||| La ' anni-anni nekpa Yesus inni-amni rla ' a Yerusalem totpena rhi ' nohora Yahudi lerlalawna Paska maka rhoratreria tuini-wedni la ' a ler maka rlergot la Mesir .
When he was twelve years old , they went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast , ||| La'pa Yesus Nmormior niana anni termida wehrani woru noma nor rewre'wa inni-amni rla ' a Yerusalem totpena rhi ' nohora lerlalawan de pa emekwalima la anni-anni inni-amni rhi ' a de .
and when they had fulfilled the days , as they were returning , the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem . Joseph and his mother did n't know it , ||| La ' pa lerlalawan de nhorwua noma rpolan wa . Mere Yesus , keke'enku ' de , Nwarin mia'ta la Yerusalem mere inni-amni raplin niohora .
but supposing him to be in the company , they went a day 's journey , and they looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances . ||| Inni-amni ratniekame Enor la mutlialawna re pa rala ' wutu pede rodi liarni la ' a yala ' a la ' a lera ida . Dewade inni-amni rwahak la ' a-mai nieka Yesus la ' a mutlialawan de la ' a inni-narni ror wutg riy maka irat niohor oleka .
When they did n't find him , they returned to Jerusalem , looking for him . ||| Mere inni-amni edonna rlernana ha lolola . Pede la ' lera wornu de inni-amni rawali owa'an la ' Yerusalem pa rwahaka .
After three days they found him in the temple , sitting in the middle of the teachers , both listening to them and asking them questions . ||| La ' lera wotellu la ' a wniahakni de na'nama rlernana E ' la Uplerlawna roma kreini de Enora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ramtatan wut pua Natlina-natailla re , ne Natian la ' a-mai makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re .
All who heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers . ||| Riy honona mak katlin reria re rwer rer wiawni la keke'enku ' de , yoma Nwet la mak ha ratiana la E ' a , de kriahi-kriahaya .
When they saw him , they were astonished , and his mother said to him , Son , why have you treated us this way ? Behold , your father and I were anxiously looking for you . ||| Inni-amni mana rwer rer wiawni la ' a'nani de . Noma inni nakot la niwra , Ama , nihya'pa Omhi ' a-myapia emkadilla mai ami ? Agor ammu mdiwra-mda'al la o yahakmu .
He said to them , Why were you looking for me ? Did n't you know that I must be in my Father 's house ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Ina , nihya'pa omuora a'mu mihak A ' u la meni-meni ? Miy e miplinga de hota A ' g etla A A'mu romni nayanni ? !
They did n't understand the saying which he spoke to them . ||| Mere inni-amni raplin niohora a'nani de lirni nnia'eratni .
And he went down with them and came to Nazareth . He was subject to them , and his mother kept all these sayings in her heart . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus nor rewre'wa inni-amni re pa rla'awa la Nasaret ne natu natlina-natailla inni-amni . Ne hare honona de er momuou lia inni ihranu ralamni .
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature , and in favor with God and men . ||| Yesus la ' pa Nlawlawan lol wa ne Na'ititar rer lia wniarora-wnialai samomuounu me yeher to ' pa Nla ' nana Uplerlawna Nor walia rimormiori ralamni .
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar , Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea , and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee , and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis , and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene , ||| La'pa Kaisar ray Tiberius nodi plolli nana anni termida wehrani wolim pa , Pontius Pilatus nhi ' a gubernur la Yudea , ray Herodes nod plolli la Galilea . Ne Pilipsu , Herodes hyalli , de nodi plolli la noha Iturea me Trakonitus , la'pa Lisanias demade nodi plolli la ' a Abilene .
during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas , the word of God came to John , the son of Zacharias , in the wilderness . ||| Ne la ' a makla ' o'ta tutulu la imam-imam honona re , de Hanas nor Kayafas . La ' anin de ralamni nekpa Uplerlawna Nhar lirni la Yohansi , Sakaria a'nani mak kden la wo'orletna-kawurloini .
He came into all the region around the Jordan , preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins . ||| Noma Yohansi nlol meni-meni to'owa la ' a gerlawna Yordan uhunu-ewatni-lahwani pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni . Yohansi nhaun pa niwra , Hoi ! Mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi re pa mai pia rharan miy ee ! Totpena hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitan miy lia do'omi-halmi !
As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet , The voice of one crying in the wilderness , ‘ Make ready the way of the Lord . Make his paths straight . ||| Yohansi hihi'ini-yapyapni mak emkade de hota emolmolan nekama mak ha rhorat targa la makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya Pukni ralamni de e riwra , Hota riy ida e polpuolu-hawaunia la wo'orletna-kawurloini pa niwra , Mpiahi ' targa talla la Orgahi-Orha ' a , mpiale'era loini-talanni .
Every valley will be filled . Every mountain and hill will be brought low . The crooked will become straight , and the rough ways smooth . ||| Mtiwria pen tani la elaw maka katro ' a-kakdielma re , me mtiurwaneha wo'ora tutulu kyawyawa re . Me loi-talan maka koili-kaili mana mhi ' wale'era , me talan maka katro ' a-kakdielma mana mpianeha wawannu .
All flesh will see God 's salvation . ' ||| Totpena rimormior nio ' nohkerna wawannu honona ramkek memna , la emkameni Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna rimormior la noha wawannu .
He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be baptized by him , You offspring of vipers , who warned you to flee from the wrath to come ? ||| Noma riy harahu ema rtiwur nana pa rma rahaka Yohansi pa rharania . Noma Yohansi nakot la dom de niwra , Hoi ! Miy di de emolmolan nekama niy mak kodi nhienni yoma mhi ' tukla-wahla . He ' ed mak kiwra la'pa rharan nek miy demade hota Uplerlawna niukum lawanni mak kmai niek de hota edon nal miy ? !
Therefore produce fruits worthy of repentance , and do n't begin to say among yourselves , ‘ We have Abraham for our father , ' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones ! ||| Mere mtiutga nhioli-liet kalwiedwedmi , totpena riy ratga de plol toto ' a mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin oleka do'omi-halmi re wa . Yana mpiarora de hota miy edonna mliernan niukum lawna yoma upmi-tgarmi de Abraham . Yoma Uplerlawna nekane Nodi plolli pa Na'ala watu-watu ri pa Nhi ' a la Abraham duratni-waitni .
Even now the ax also lies at the root of the trees . Every tree therefore that does n't produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire . ||| Mhioratreri ee ! Uplerlawna e Nwahi ' meman targa pa Nukmua he ' to ' a mak edon kolin doinia do'oni-halli . Yoma emeknekama Nwahi ' targa wro'onni pa na Netan dodioinia ora-au onni pa la ntut lia ga'arni re honona . La'pa ora-au muaka edon kawo ' a samomuounu , de hota Nhoi wro'onni la pa Nnaklia la ai ralamni .
The multitudes asked him , What then must we do ? ||| Noma riy lia mutlialawna re ratiana Yohansi riwra , Hade emkade , de hota amhi ' a hya ' a wa ?
He answered them , He who has two coats , let him give to him who has none . He who has food , let him do likewise . ||| Noma Yohansi nakot la re niwra , La riy maka hanni raini woru , de nal id la ' a riy mak kakleh raini . Ne la ' riy maka ya'anni-yemannu erla de nhakra la mak kakleha .
Tax collectors also came to be baptized , and they said to him , Teacher , what must we do ? ||| Me mak kawoka blastena mana rmai pia totpena Yohansi nharania re . Noma ratiana Yohansi riwra , Tungkurga ! Hota emkameni wal miai ami ?
He said to them , Collect no more than that which is appointed to you . ||| Noma Yohansi nakot la niwra , Yan memmemna mimpiak de narehi-nalawan la maka miy o'tami ha nhopan pa mlia miwoka .
Soldiers also asked him , saying , What about us ? What must we do ? He said to them , Extort from no one by violence , neither accuse anyone wrongfully . Be content with your wages . ||| La ' hande mana makodi keki-rautu ratian nohor walia emkameni la ira ? Noma Yohansi nakot la re niwra , Yan memmemna mpiarui-mpiate'la rira kupanni-kaini yoma mtiota-mpiud riy de la hal wawna . Mere mi'ina-miemun neka kaimi la ' liwatmi-odapmi welli !
As the people were in expectation , and all men reasoned in their hearts concerning John , whether perhaps he was the Christ , ||| La ' ler de riy rwei rieri Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa rwarora , Yanpa Yohanis di , de ed maka ha rakota riwra Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka it twei-tnara inhattio ?
John answered them all , I indeed baptize you with water , but he comes who is mightier than I , the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to loosen . He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire . ||| Noma la ' hade pede Yohansi nakot la re niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , a ' di agala gera ga gharani miy , mere hota riy mak kmai die , Nala Uplerlawna Nhiwni tiy miy me emekwalima Nala ai na Nharani miy . E Nareh dioin a ' u . Hota awue'er doin lakni wniowni ho'mana a ' g edonna puar nana .
His winnowing fan is in his hand , and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor , and will gather the wheat into his barn , but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire . ||| Ne hota emolmolan nekama E ' ed maka ktorreria totopa maka ra ralipra-ratai metma-wetra ' lawna gandum . Metma-wetra ' lawan de , hota rawoka la ' a dudnu kliala ralamni , mere hota kownu re honona de rwalia la ai miaka takeni rwarum nana !
Then with many other exhortations he preached good news to the people , ||| Pa emkade mamain la Yohansi nano ' a-na'atga rira la ' a hya ' to ' a , la ' ler maka ha nakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota de la ' ira .
but Herod the tetrarch , being reproved by him for Herodias , his brother 's wife , and for all the evil things which Herod had done , ||| Mere Herodes mak kodi plolli la Galilea de , Yohansi namer matni pa npolliohora , yoma nor owa'ana yerni Herodias rmehlima , me npolliohor walia Herodes yatni-halli dom to ' a honona maka ha nhi ' oleka wa .
added this also to them all , that he shut up John in prison . ||| Mere Herodes edonna nmaltier eti , ne yeher to'ama nhi ' rereria yatni-halli la ' a enken tiarga Yohansi la roma nhio'la ralamni .
Now when all the people were baptized , Jesus also had been baptized and was praying . The sky was opened , ||| La'pa edon rken mia'ta Yohansi la roma nhio'la ralamni , de la'pa Yohansi entepartar ma't la nhiarania riy harahu re , noma Yesus Nmai wial pia rharania wa ! Ne la'pa Yohansi nharania Yesus pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nsumbain reri dewade lyanti nhar dioinia .
and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form like a dove on him , and a voice came out of the sky , saying You are my beloved Son . In you I am well pleased . ||| Pa Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nerun de emolmolla ma'nu lmo'ma maru merpati pa ntai lia wawannu . Noma ratlin de Uplerlawna Nhar lirni la ' a lyanti Niwra , O ' de A A'nu mak Asiayni inhatti . O ' ed maka kla ' nana A ralmu .
Jesus himself , when he began to teach , was about thirty years old , being the son as was supposed of Joseph , the son of Heli , ||| La ' lera Yesus Nwau kniarni de tuwnu la'pa edonna rhal de anni terampwotelu . La ' a rira wniarorni de E ' de Yusup a'na raralamni . Yusup amni de Eli .
the son of Matthat , the son of Levi , the son of Melchi , the son of Jannai , the son of Joseph , ||| Eli amni de Matat , Matat amni de Lewi , Lewi amni de Malki , Malki amni de Yanai , Yanai amni de Yusup .
the son of Mattathias , the son of Amos , the son of Nahum , the son of Esli , the son of Naggai , ||| Yusup amni de Matica , Matica amni de Amos , Amos amni de Nahum , Nahum amni de Hesli , Hesli amni de Nagai ,
the son of Maath , the son of Mattathias , the son of Semein , the son of Joseph , the son of Judah , ||| Nagai amni de Maat , Maat amni de Matica , Matica amni de Simei , Simei amni de Yosek , Yosek amni de Yoda ,
the son of Joanan , the son of Rhesa , the son of Zerubbabel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Neri , ||| Yoda amni de Yohanan , Yohanan amni de Resa , Resa amni de Serubabel , Serubabel amni de Sealtiela , Sealtiel amni de Neri ,
the son of Melchi , the son of Addi , the son of Cosam , the son of Elmodam , the son of Er , ||| Neri amni de Malki , Malki amni de Adi , Adi amni de Kosam , Kosam amni de Elmadam , Elmadam amni de Er ,
the son of Jose , the son of Eliezer , the son of Jorim , the son of Matthat , the son of Levi , ||| Er amni de Yesua , Yesua amni de Elieser , Elieser amni de Yorim , Yorim amni de Matat , Matat amni de Lewi ,
the son of Simeon , the son of Judah , the son of Joseph , the son of Jonan , the son of Eliakim , ||| Lewi amni de Simeon , Simeon amni de Yehuda , Yehuda amni de Yusup , Yusup amni de Yonam , Yonam amni de Elyakim ,
the son of Melea , the son of Menan , the son of Mattatha , the son of Nathan , the son of David , ||| Elyakim amni de Mela , Mela amni de Mina , Mina amni de Matata , Matata amni de Natan , Natan amni de Daud ,
the son of Jesse , the son of Obed , the son of Boaz , the son of Salmon , the son of Nahshon , ||| Daud amni de Isai , Isai amni de Obed , Obed amni de Boas , Boas amni de Salmon , Salmon amni de Nahason ,
the son of Amminadab , the son of Aram , the son of Hezron , the son of Perez , the son of Judah , ||| Nahason amni de Aminadab , Aminadab amni de Admin , Admin amni de Arni , Arni amni de Hesron , Hesron amni de Peres , Peres amni de Yehuda ,
the son of Jacob , the son of Isaac , the son of Abraham , the son of Terah , the son of Nahor , ||| Yehuda amni de Yakop , Yakop amni de Isak , Isak amni de Abraham , Abraham amni de Terah , Terah amni de Nahor ,
the son of Serug , the son of Reu , the son of Peleg , the son of Eber , the son of Shelah , ||| Nahor amni de Serug , Serug amni de Rehu , Rehu amni de Peleg , Peleg amni de Eber , Eber amni de Salmon ,
the son of Cainan , the son of Arphaxad , the son of Shem , the son of Noah , the son of Lamech , ||| Salmon amni de Kenan , Kenan amni de Arpaksad , Arpaksad amni de Sem , Sem amni de Nuh , Nuh amni de Lamek ,
the son of Methuselah , the son of Enoch , the son of Jared , the son of Mahalaleel , the son of Cainan , ||| Lamek amni de Metusala , Metusala amni de Henok , Henok amni de Yared , Yared amni de Mahalaleel , Mahalaleel amni de Kenan ,
the son of Enos , the son of Seth , the son of Adam , the son of God . ||| Kenan amni de Enos , Enos amni de Set , Set amni de Adam , ne Adam amni Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
Jesus , full of the Holy Spirit , returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness ||| Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la Yesus la ' ler maka Nlergot la gerlawna Yordan . Noma Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodia Yesus la wo'orletna-kawurloini .
for forty days , being tempted by the devil . He ate nothing in those days . Afterward , when they were completed , he was hungry . ||| La'pa Nden la hande noma hegana amlawanni nta ' niana la lera-mela terampwogata . La lelera-melmel de Yesus edonna na'ana hadomdoma , pede la ' a lera terampwogata hohoni de Naplar memna .
The devil said to him , If you are the Son of God , command this stone to become bread . ||| Noma hegana nakot la Yesus niwra , Hoi ! Uplerlawna A'nani O ' a toh ? ! Mhuopan teka watgau di pa nwal lia yamanna pa Omu'una .
Jesus answered him , saying , It is written , ‘ Man shall not live by bread alone , but by every word of God . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hota A ' g edon liernohora o lirmu de , yoma la ' Puka ralamni de nakot nohor oleka de , Rimormiori edonna rmormior die yoma la ' a yamanna nmeh ' a .
The devil , leading him up on a high mountain , showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time . ||| Noma hegan de nodia Yesus la wo'or tutul liawna id hananni , ne mtatande nekpa hegana ntutga hairi-hairi kerajaan mak kden la noha wawannu honona la ' Yesus ,
The devil said to him , I will give you all this authority and their glory , for it has been delivered to me , and I give it to whomever I want . ||| na'nama niwra , Hota agala pa Muodi plolli la hairi-hairi re me Mliernana hairi-hairi re re'eni-tniarnu , yoma la ' hare honona rala oleka mai a ' u pede agiwa gala la he ' to ' de plolli nek ma ' a wua .
If you therefore will worship before me , it will all be yours . ||| Hairi-hairi honona re hota agala tiy O ' a pa Omuodi plolli la , hornama Omtiuk pua Mhu'ru la a la'ku nayanni .
Jesus answered him , Get behind me , Satan ! For it is written , ‘ You shall worship the Lord your God , and you shall serve him only . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mere etla Puka ralamni de e niwra , Riy honona rhu'ru-rhelam la Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawanni , me ratlina-ratail to'ola Ha Nakotkota .
He led him to Jerusalem and set him on the pinnacle of the temple , and said to him , If you are the Son of God , cast yourself down from here , ||| La'pa nhorwua noma hegana amlawanni de nodia Yesus pa nla'awa la ' a Yerusalem na'nama nkenia la Uplerlawna roma kreini wuwannu pa Ntutrier lia hande na'nama hegana nakot la Yesus niwra , Plola O ' di de Uplerlawna A'nani O ' a , de Mnieh gerun tek la handina !
for it is written , ‘ He will put his angels in charge of you , to guard you , ' ||| Yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e niwra , Hota Uplerlawna Nhopna pa hopopanni ratiak reri o ' a .
and , ‘ On their hands they will bear you up , lest perhaps you dash your foot against a stone . ' ||| Hota rkim o ' a totpena yana mtiuini ne watgau mana hota edonna rtai o ' a .
Jesus answering , said to him , It has been said , ‘ You shall not tempt the Lord your God . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Mere etla Puka ralamni de e niwra , Yan memmemna rimormiori rta'aga Orgahi-Orha ' a mak kla ' ir Uplerlawanni yoma ir rhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi podpodku-padpadku dewade rwak la Orgahi-Orha ' a pa Namori-nalewn ira !
When the devil had completed every temptation , he departed from him until another time . ||| La'pa hegana amlawanni de ntot la ' a-maiya Yesus dewade nto'or la pa nwei lerni-melli dom to ' owa'ana .
Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee , and news about him spread through all the surrounding area . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nawal lia Galilea ne Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la . Nwewar la gen die uhunu-ewatni-lahwani , de npe'era-npah ' a la Yesus kotni-nanni .
He taught in their synagogues , being glorified by all . ||| Enwatutu-nwaye ' a la ' a roma-lewu muaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli , ne riy honona ra'uli-rawedia E ' a .
He came to Nazareth , where he had been brought up . He entered , as was his custom , into the synagogue on the Sabbath day , and stood up to read . ||| Noma Yesus Nla ' owa'an la leta Nasaret , la ' a gen miaka Enor inni-amni rdella la ' ler maka Ha Nlalawan lola de . La ' a Sabat lerni maka Yahudi edon rkar lia de , de Yesus Nla ' a gen miaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli , pa emeknekama nhi'inde Enhi ' nana . Noma Enaprir pia Npaikia Puklawna .
The book of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him . He opened the book , and found the place where it was written , ||| Ne rala makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya Pukni . La'pa Enweran doinia Puka pniopan della dewade Nahak pa Nlernana ayat id totpena Npaikia la rira gaini ralamni . Ayat de lirni emkadi ,
The Spirit of the Lord is on me , because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor . He has sent me to heal the broken hearted , to proclaim release to the captives , recovering of sight to the blind , to deliver those who are crushed , ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhiwni etla A ino'nu . Yoma E ' ed mak ktutmuata-kewra ' A ' u totpena ukot nohora Kot Kalwied della mak kakleha-kaplara . E ' ed mak khopn a pua ukot nohora la ' a riy maka rwutu-rkoh tiaru hota rolin doin ir la , me rwe'era aphyaria mak matni kyata , me rolin doinia la maka rutni-rdahla re .
and to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord . ||| Ne totpena ukot nohora Orgahi-Orha ' a wennu-wolanni maka kmai nieka di maka hota Entutga ralam kalwiedni la E mutnu-rahanu .
He closed the book , gave it back to the attendant , and sat down . The eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him . ||| Yesus Npaik pa nhorwua noma Npopn owa'ana Puk della genni , ne Nal owa'ana la ' mak ktorna Puka re , nhor nioma Namtatna totpa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re . Riy honona mak khi ' a krei re rwatniar reria Yesus .
He began to tell them , Today , this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing . ||| Dewade Nakot emkarella Niwra , Hya ' maka Apuaik oleka ri de Aghi ' olek la dodo'ondi memna .
All testified about him and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth , and they said , Is n't this Joseph 's son ? ||| Lira-tun muaka Ha Nakota re narieiniande irwer rer wiawni la ne rwarora de samoga re pede irarian la heyanna pa rre'ela rhi ' nohor walia E ' a menyokong . Mere nhorwua noma emeknekama ralamni re rakwali pa edon rpesiaya , pa idma nakot la ida , Hade de Yusup a'nani to ' neka hadi toh ? !
He said to them , Doubtless you will tell me this proverb , ‘ Physician , heal yourself ! Whatever we have heard done at Capernaum , do also here in your hometown . ' ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Agatga de miy miwra mikot la mai A lia hya ' mak riy nhi'inde riwra , La'pa plollolli de dokter o ' a de orgahamu mhi ' kalwied teka orgahamu . Yoma miy wniarormi de la'pa plollolli de Agodi plolli pa ghi ' oleka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat la Kapernaum emeka mitlin nana oleka , de hota Atiut walia A plo'lu-mneh ' u pa ghi ' tek walia hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona la ' a A let wamueh ' u dina .
He said , Most certainly I tell you , no prophet is acceptable in his hometown . ||| Mere mhioratreria me ! Hota la ' makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida , riy edon rreiniana-ra'nana la ' e let wamueheni , yoma mak kden la e letni re edonna rpesiaya .
But truly I tell you , there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah , when the sky was shut up three years and six months , when a great famine came over all the land . ||| Mimpiesiay A li'ru di ! La ' a Elia lerni , de otna edonna ntur niana anni wotel riehenu , pa nhi'nande lar lawna nwewar noha . La ' ler de patyata harahu la ' a Israel .
Elijah was sent to none of them , except to Zarephath , in the land of Sidon , to a woman who was a widow . ||| La ' emkade ho'mana Uplerlawna edonna Nhopna Elia nla ' a riy id la ' a patyata re , mere eneknek to'ama nla ' patyata id la ' a Sarfat la ' a genia Sidon .
There were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet , yet not one of them was cleansed , except Naaman , the Syrian . ||| Emkade walia la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu Elisa lerni de mak kden la Israel liawanni rlernana nhieni ulityata-temyata ho'mana riy id edonna nkalwied eti eneknek to'ama Na'aman , de riy Siria ida .
They were all filled with wrath in the synagogue as they heard these things . ||| La'pa iratlin E lirni mak emkade dewade hare honona la ' a gen die ralamni rawenan doin la .
They rose up , threw him out of the city , and led him to the brow of the hill that their city was built on , that they might throw him off the cliff . ||| Honona raprir pia rhokar doinia Yesus la ' a leta to'orni , pa ra rpuitia la ' a tuini werna ida , maka ha rariria letni de . La ralma-riorni totpena rotliernia Yesus la ' a tuini werna kdieldelam de ralamni .
But he , passing through the middle of them , went his way . ||| Mere Yesus Nala ' a la riy mutlialawna re letgarni pa nadil doin la Nla'awa .
He came down to Capernaum , a city of Galilee . He was teaching them on the Sabbath day , ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nla'awa la leta Kapernaum la Galilea . La hande de Enwatutga riy rahu la ' a Sabat lerni , maka Yahudi edon rkar lia de .
and they were astonished at his teaching , for his word was with authority . ||| Riy rwer rer wiawni la wniatutnu-wniaye'eni de , yoma Nodi plolli wibawa pa Nwatutu .
In the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean demon , and he cried out with a loud voice , ||| La ' a gen miaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli la , de riy ida maka hegana nhu'ru ralma . Nhaunu-nhaunu pa niwra ,
saying , Ah ! what have we to do with you , Jesus of Nazareth ? Have you come to destroy us ? I know who you are , the Holy One of God ! ||| Hoi , Yesus Nasartu ne ! Hota Omhi ' nan emkameni mai ami oo ! Ommuai pia mpieyat ami ? A ' g e gat niohora de he ' O ' a ! O ' di de maran yamou-wuhur yatoha yang suci maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana pa Nhopan pa Ommuai lia nohkerna wawannu !
Jesus rebuked him , saying , Be silent and come out of him ! When the demon had thrown him down in the middle of them , he came out of him , having done him no harm . ||| Dewade Yesus Nkamota Niwra , Rhodal nurmu ! Rhokargo'tu la ' a riy di ! Noma yatni-rha'ani de nhi ' riy de pa ntuini la tani wawannu la ' a riy honona gaini ralamni , nhor nia'nama yatni-rha'ani de nhargot wa , mere riy de edonna na'eram nana mehra-mau kuku ' eti .
Amazement came on all and they spoke together , one with another , saying , What is this word ? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits , and they come out ! ||| Riy honona rwer rer wiawni me idma nakot la ida riwra , Ha yaltierni de Nodi plolli la hegana-kawnu , yatni-rha'ani pa ema rho'or dodioinia !
News about him went out into every place of the surrounding region . ||| La ' hade pede yeher to'ama Yesus kotni-nanni ema reyapie'era la geni-tiena re honona mak rehgorgoru .
He rose up from the synagogue and entered into Simon 's house . Simon 's mother-in-law was afflicted with a great fever , and they begged him to help her . ||| La'pa Yesus Nhoitio'or la gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli de , noma Nodi liarni la Simon romni . La ' de Simon yananni entepartarlia riuru npahna nohora tema pniahnani , noma rwaka Yesus pa Ntulan la .
He stood over her and rebuked the fever , and it left her . Immediately she rose up and served them . ||| Pede Yesus Nla Nwakriania patke ' de yanin genni , na'nama Nkamota ruru pniahna della ' patke ' de , dewade nnienni de nmolu . Noma namat meman pa nla nwahi ' a-nwayodia ya'ana-yemnu pa honona ra'ana-remnia .
When the sun was setting , all those who had any sick with various diseases brought them to him , and he laid his hands on every one of them , and healed them . ||| La'pa lera ntuinia dewade riy rahu rodia inni-narni honona maka kler la nnieni-nhiena mehra-mau pa rma rahaka Yesus . La ' pa Yesus Nran limni la mak kanieni re riy nenenna wawannu , dewade honona re nnienni rkalwied wa .
Demons also came out of many , crying out and saying , You are the Christ , the Son of God ! Rebuking them , he did n't allow them to speak , because they knew that he was the Christ . ||| Yatni-rha'ani , hegana-kawnu re mana rlergot momuou lia riy harahu me yatni-rha'ani polpuolu-hawaunia riwra , Amatg oleka de Uplerlawna A'nani O ' ee ! Mere Yesus Nkamota re totpena yana rakot nohor E ' a , yoma hegana-kawnu re rat niohora de Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa E inhatta .
When it was day , he departed and went into an uninhabited place and the multitudes looked for him , and came to him , and held on to him , so that he would n't go away from them . ||| La'pa lera matni nra'pa gota dewade Yesus Nhoitio'ora la let de wa , ne Nokria geni hgali ida . Riy rahu rtepartarlia yahakni , pa la'pa rlernana de honona rwak memna E ' a totpena yana Nwarei lia ir onni .
But he said to them , I must preach the good news of God 's Kingdom to the other cities also . For this reason I have been sent . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota maka rakot nohora emkameni la Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la riy pa emeka ir Rayni , de hota A'ukot nohora la miy edonna mieh ' a mere A'ukot nohor walia la leta-leta korni dom to ' wali . Yoma la hade pede Uplerlawna ed mak khopan pa Amuai lia nohkeran di wawannu !
He was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee . ||| La ' hade pede Yesus Nla ' pa Nokru roma-lewu dom to ' a maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la , la ' a Yudea liewnu , pa Nakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' hande .
Now while the multitude pressed on him and heard the word of God , he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret . ||| La lera ida , Yesus Enaprir rier lia danau Genesaret eni wawannu pa Nakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni , ne riy rahu rwakdieh ' a pa rmai pia ratlina E lirni .
He saw two boats standing by the lake , but the fishermen had gone out of them and were washing their nets . ||| Noma Yesus Namkek de mak kla ' lora puounu worga rapniali ne matromni re rerun oleka pa rtepartarlia ramoga tialli rella eni wawannu .
He entered into one of the boats , which was Simon 's , and asked him to put out a little from the land . He sat down and taught the multitudes from the boat . ||| La ' noma Yesus Nha'at la puou id de , maka riy ida nwawa Simon gahani , na'nama Yesus Nwak pa Simon nahlera puounu de keke'ela ' lora . Na'nama Yesus Namtatna la puou die ralamni pa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy rariahu re .
When he had finished speaking , he said to Simon , Put out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch . ||| La'pa Yesus Nwatut pua nhorwua . Noma Nakot la Simon Niwra , Mpuehelia pupallu pa mutial i'na .
Simon answered him , Master , we worked all night and caught nothing , but at your word I will let down the net . ||| Noma Simon nakot la niwra , Tuna , orawia mel matmiat liawan de amahak i'na mere ami edonna mliernan et hya ' doma ! Mere yoma Tuna e Nhopna , pede agiwa lia ' tieka .
When they had done this , they caught a great multitude of fish , and their net was breaking . ||| La'pa ir Simon rinni tialli , dewade tialli nma nwenna la i'na , pa reiniande tiala natpoini-nahliawra .
They beckoned to their partners in the other boat , that they should come and help them . They came and filled both boats , so that they began to sink . ||| Pede rkawlia mutwualli puou handina de pa rma rre'ela , ramoga i'na la tiala . Noka rmai pia rwatierun nana la puou re pa narieiniande nhi'pa rtepra .
But Simon Peter , when he saw it , fell down at Jesus ' knees , saying , Depart from me , for I am a sinful man , Lord . ||| La'pa Simon Petrusa nlina-nmata namkeka hare honona dewade nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Yesus nayanni na'nama nakot la niwra , Yan muor nek a ' tialan wa Matroma , yoma a ' di de , riy dodo ' a-halal id a ' u .
For he was amazed , and all who were with him , at the catch of fish which they had caught , ||| Nakot emkade yoma Simon nor neka mutwualli la ' puounu de , rwer rer wiawni la i'n mutlialawna maka rlernana re .
and so also were James and John , sons of Zebedee , who were partners with Simon . Jesus said to Simon , Do n't be afraid . From now on you will be catching people alive . ||| Emkade walia Simon mutwualli la ' puou handina , de Yakowsi nor Yohansi , Sebedeus upni-a'nani re . Noma Yesus Nakot la Simon Niwra , Yan mumta'ata Simona ! Mai pia Awuatut o ' a totpena emkameni la omultial reri i'na la dodo'ondi , de hota emkade wal pia muhak nohor rimormiori totpena hota rpesiay mai A ' u .
When they had brought their boats to land , they left everything , and followed him . ||| Dewade Simon nora mutwualli re rtitin targa loini-puounu dewade raltarga hare honona pa rla rlernohor reria Yesus .
While he was in one of the cities , behold , there was a man full of leprosy . When he saw Jesus , he fell on his face and begged him , saying , Lord , if you want to , you can make me clean . ||| La'awa lera ida , de Yesus Nden la leta ida la geni dom to ' a . Muanke ' ida ed walia la hande la ' inonni tetema de nanienia ulityata-temyata lepra . La'pa mak kanienia ulityat de namkek tut niana Yesus dewade nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Yesus na'nama nwak la Yesus niwra , Amee ! Mtiulan mai a ' u . Agat niohora de Omuodi plolli pa Mhi ' kalwied nan a ' u , hornama Ompuayow nohora a wakwa'ku , up matro'mu nee !
He stretched out his hand and touched him , saying , I want to . Be made clean . Immediately the leprosy left him . ||| Noma Yesus Nran limni pa Nteman la riy de pa Nakot la , Arieiniana o wakwakmu pa omkialwied wa ! Mtatande nekpa nnienni de nmolu .
He commanded him to tell no one , But go your way and show yourself to the priest , and offer for your cleansing according to what Moses commanded , for a testimony to them . ||| Noma Yesus Nawewla eda riy de Niwra , Mlia'awa , mere yana mpuahauria la riy meni-meni . Mere mlia ' mliernohora hya ' maka Musa ha ne'era-ntatar targ oleka , de mlia ' a imam ida , pa mpuak la totpena namkek memna omkialwied olekwa . Me muala limtutnu emeka Musa nwatut tiarg oleka de totpa riy honona rat niohora de omkialwied oleka la nnienmu .
But the report concerning him spread much more , and great multitudes came together to hear and to be healed by him of their infirmities . ||| Mere Nlarna pa naltieri ho'mana , kota la Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni re yeher to'ama nayapie'er la wniahauru . La ' hade pede rirahu rmai totpena ratlin la Yesus wniatutnu me rwak pa Yesus Nhi ' kalwieda ir la nnienni-nhienni .
But he withdrew himself into the desert and prayed . ||| Ne lera dom de Yesus Nla Nsumbain la geni-gen miaka namtiertiernu .
On one of those days , he was teaching , and there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by who had come out of every village of Galilee , Judea , and Jerusalem . The power of the Lord was with him to heal them . ||| La'awa la ' lera ida , de Yesus e Nwatutu-nwaye ' rer lia gen ida , ne riy Parisi dom rora tungkurga agama re e ramtatan walia la hande . Parisi rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re rmai die dom de rwatiawua Yerusalem , dom de rwatiawua leta-let honona mak kden la Yudea , me Galilea . La ' ler de de Orgahi-Orha ' a plolli-mneheni e npenpuen lia Yesus pa Nhi ' a mak kanieni re honona rpa rler la kalwiedni .
Behold , men brought a paralyzed man on a cot , and they sought to bring him in to lay before Jesus . ||| La ' ler de wali pia riy doma rma rodia riy maka kaliu'uta ida de rran nan wut tio ' a la u'tani maka nanin la . Riy mak kodia re rwahak talan pa rler la roma ralamni totpena rle'er memna mak kaliu'ut della , la ' a Yesus gaini ralamni .
Not finding a way to bring him in because of the multitude , they went up to the housetop and let him down through the tiles with his cot into the middle before Jesus . ||| Mere la ' ler de de riy rahu rehia , pede edonna rlernan talan pa rodia la ' a rialma , pa narieiniande rodia pa rha'at la roma wuwannu na'nama rwaye'er doinia roma ritni . Na'nama ralernu mak kaliu'uta de na'itar neka u'tani totpa nle'era la Yesus gaini raralamni la ' a mutu letgarni .
Seeing their faith , he said to him , Man , your sins are forgiven you . ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek tutga riy mak kmai re pesiayni raruri , noma Yesus Nakot la riy de Niwra , Hyalia , dodo'ondi A'umou-uwitn olek o do'omu-halmu !
The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason , saying , Who is this who speaks blasphemies ? Who can forgive sins , but God alone ? ||| Dewade makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rora riy Parisi rwarora-rwalai la ralamni riwra , He ' eda riy dina de pede Enparan pia Enaltier emkade pa Napolu-naliella Uplerlawna ? ! Yoma atiaru Uplerlawna nanpena Namou-nawitna rira do'oni-halli .
But Jesus , perceiving their thoughts , answered them , Why are you reasoning so in your hearts ? ||| Mere Yesus Natg oleka hya ' ed maka ha ratiana re pede Nakot la re Niwra , Ee , hya ' ed mak kariei pia mimpiarora-mpialai yatiana rena ? !
Which is easier to say , ‘ Your sins are forgiven you , ' or to say , ‘ Arise and walk ' ? ||| La'pa plet pa A'ukot nek la e ' a giwra e do'oni-halli ramou-rawitn oleka de , miplin niohor ma'ta plollola pa e do'oni-halli ramou-rawitn oleka me edonna , mere la'pa Apuaran pia A'ukot la e ' pa namat pa nala'awa de mimiat niohor memna A ru'ru-la'yu etla yoma mimkek nan memna .
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins , he said to the paralyzed man , I tell you , arise , take up your cot , and go to your house . ||| Pede hota la ' dodo'ondi de Agiwra tiut muemna tiy miy , la ' a noh di wawannu , de Rimormiori A'nani A ' g ed mak kodi plolli pa umou-uwitna riy do'oni-halli . Noma Yesus Nakot la mak kaliu'ut de Niwra , Hyalia , mumat doin la pa mpuopna u'tamu de pa mlia'awa rommu .
Immediately he rose up before them , and took up that which he was laying on , and departed to his house , glorifying God . ||| Mtatande nekpa riy de namat doin la ' a riy mutlialawna re gaini ralamni pa npopna u'tani dewade nla'awa la roma nayanni . Ntiy die na'uli-nawed reri Uplerlawna .
Amazement took hold on all , and they glorified God . They were filled with fear , saying , We have seen strange things today . ||| Ne riy honona la hande mana rwer rer wiawni , ne ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna la ' genni-tienni Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Noma ramta'at pa riwra , It edonna tamkek ma'ta hihi ' a-yapyapi maka itamkeka la ' ler di !
After these things he went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax office , and said to him , Follow me ! ||| La'pa Yesus Nlergot wa noma Namkek nana mak kawoka blastena id de nanni Lewi . La ' ler de de Lewi e namtatan la gen miaka nhi'inde enawoka blasten la . Noma Yesus Npol lia Niwra , E ! Mua mliernohor A ' g ee !
He left everything , and rose up and followed him . ||| Noma Lewi naltarga re'eni-tniarnu honona na'nama nlernohora Yesus .
Levi made a great feast for him in his house . There was a great crowd of tax collectors and others who were reclining with them . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Lewi nhi ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna pa rora Yesus ra'an wutu . Maka nhi'inde kawoka blastena re liawanni rmai wial pia rora riy rahu mak kden la hande rawok pa ra'ana-remun rewre'wa la hande .
Their scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his disciples , saying , Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners ? ||| Mere riy Parisi makla ' makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ror wutga Parisi doma ramkek nana Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni de pa rwaror la ralamni de mehra rehia pede rpolliohora maklernohor reria Yesus riwra , Oi ! Nihya'pa miy hononmi miora maka kawoka blastena ror wutga riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala doma mi'in wutu-miemun wutu ? !
Jesus answered them , Those who are healthy have no need for a physician , but those who are sick do . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mak edonna kanieni edonna rma rahaka dokter . Eneknek to ' a makamehra nanpena ed mak kwahaka dokter .
I have not come to call the righteous , but sinners , to repentance . ||| Amuai die A ' g edonna mua puolga riy mak kiwra irakleha do ' a-hala , mere Amuai di totpa Apuolga riy dodo ' a-halala pa rhoitio'or doini do'oni-halli re .
They said to him , Why do John 's disciples often fast and pray , likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees , but yours eat and drink ? ||| Noma riy Parisi re rakot la Yesus riwra , Maklernohora Yohansi ror maklernohor riy Parisi la ' lera dom de ratahan lara me rsumbaini . Mere maklernohor reri O ' a re ra'ana-remun to'owa .
He said to them , Can you make the friends of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , A ' di de emeknekama muanke ' a mak kiwra kmehlima . Riy maka rpol niana-rwak nana pa ra'ana la yawoka-yale ' u la mehlima-marya ' a , de hota edonna ratahan lara mere ra'ana-remnu ramuki-rahepru .
But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them . Then they will fast in those days . ||| Mere hota la'pa nte'ela la ' lerni , nanpena ira'ala muanke ' a maka kmehlim della mak ka'an wutu re onni . La ' ler de nampena iratahan lara .
He also told a parable to them . No one puts a piece from a new garment on an old garment , or else he will tear the new , and also the piece from the new will not match the old . ||| Dewade Yesus Nwahaur nohora yawalliohora id owa'an la ira , Niwra , Riy edonna rga ' pua rlihira kokanan warwuaru pa ra rtapla la rain mak kawniali . Yoma rweyat oleka kokanan warwuar die . Me kokanan warwuar die la'pa rlowan wutga la pola-rain mak kawniali de hota nmeh ' a namemieheiya .
No one puts new wine into old wineskins , or else the new wine will burst the skins , and it will be spilled and the skins will be destroyed . ||| Emkade wal lia riy edonna rga ' pua rhuria anggur tur warwuarnu la ' a ha ulit mak mahnek oleka . Yoma anggur tur warwuarnu de hota nhi ' nana ha ulit mahnek de ema reye'era pa anggur tur de rhur dioinia ne ha ulit de ho'mana ta'en niana rnair owa'ana .
But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins , and both are preserved . ||| Anggur tur warwuaru de rhuria la ha ulit warwuaru .
No man having drunk old wine immediately desires new , for he says , ‘ The old is better . ' ||| Ne riy honona mak nhi'inde remun anggur tur mak gakmu de rahmena remun owa'ana anggur warwuaru yoma rwarora de mak gakmu ed mak samomuou rehi .
Now on the second Sabbath after the first , he was going through the grain fields . His disciples plucked the heads of grain and ate , rubbing them in their hands . ||| La lera id la ' Sabat lerni , de Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rala ' a la nhyi ' wetra ' lawna ida ralamni , noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rkura wetra ' lawna unnu-unnu pa rwakliaria la limni na'nama ra'ana .
But some of the Pharisees said to them , Why do you do that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day ? ||| Noma riy Parisi dom mak kden la hande rakot la riwra , Hoi ! Nihya'pa mpiera-mdiaitia it agamni deullu-tatarni yoma miy e mkiar lia ' a Sabat lerni ? !
Jesus , answering them , said , Have n't you read what David did when he was hungry , he and those who were with him , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Miy mpiaik nan olek la ' a hya ' maka Daud nhi ' a la ' lera e nora e talanwalli re raplara toh ? !
how he entered into God 's house , and took and ate the show bread , and gave also to those who were with him , which is not lawful to eat except for the priests alone ? ||| Enler la Uplerlawna roma kreini na'nama na'ala rot miaka ha ral oleka la Uplerlawna , na'nama na'ana . Nhor nia'nama nal walia roti rella ' mutu korni pa ra'an wal lia . Mere la'pa deulu-tatra agama , de mak ka'ana roti re de eneknek to ' a imam-imam rmeh ' a .
He said to them , The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath . ||| A'ukot hari honona yoma la ' a Rimormiori A'nani A ' die , A ' g ed mak kodi plolli pa A'ukot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplola onde nhala pa itsi ' a la Sabat lerni .
It also happened on another Sabbath that he entered into the synagogue and taught . There was a man there , and his right hand was withered . ||| La lera id la ' Sabat lerni id to ' wali , ne Yesus la Nwatutu-nwaye'ela ' gen miaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli . La ' noma Namkek nana riy ida etla hande de limni walli malganna nmati .
The scribes and the Pharisees watched him , to see whether he would heal on the Sabbath , that they might find an accusation against him . ||| Tungkurga agama dom rora riy Parisi riwra rahaka kahelli-kaha'arni la ' Yesus totpena Nhi ' de rodia la letgara lawawna hakim . Pede honona rkil rer lia hota Nhi ' kalwieda makamehra-kamau la Sabat lerni me edonna ?
But he knew their thoughts , and he said to the man who had the withered hand , Rise up and stand in the middle . He arose and stood . ||| Mere la ' a ira wniarorni-wnialaini re , de Yesus Natg oleka re ! Dewade Yesus Nakot la riy maka limni walli kmat die Niwra , Ee ! Muprir pia mua mtiutrier lia riy honona gaini ralamni ! Noma riy de naprir pia nma ntutrier lia hande .
Then Jesus said to them , I will ask you something , Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good , or to do harm ? To save a life , or to kill ? ||| Nhor nia'nama Yesus Nakot la riy mak kden la ' hande Niwra , Hota A'utian tek miy , la ' a agama deullu-tatarni de rakot targa hota it tsi ' a hya ' a la Sabat lerni ? Hota it tsi ' a samomuounu me onde tsi ' a yatyatni ? Tamori-talewna rimormior me onde twaror nohora wniunu-wnienna la it rimormior wialli ?
He looked around at them all , and said to the man , Stretch out your hand . He did , and his hand was restored as sound as the other . ||| Nhor nia'nama Yesus Namkek la riy nenenan gaini ne Nakot la riy de Niwra , Mpuetar limmu ! Noma riy de nwetar limni , dewade mtatande nekpa nnienni nmolu .
But they were filled with rage , and talked with one another about what they might do to Jesus . ||| Mere , yeher to'ama makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re rora riy Parisi re humra-kailia la yawenna , ne rawok pa rna'ohma Yesus la ' yatyatni wa .
In these days , he went out to the mountain to pray , and he continued all night in prayer to God . ||| La'awa ler id de noma Yesus Nafia'at la wo'ora id hananni pa Nsumbaini . La ' mel tetem de Ensumbain nek la Uplerlawna pa nodi liarni .
When it was day , he called his disciples , and from them he chose twelve , whom he also named apostles , ||| Nsumbain nekpa la'pa repra rauria , noma Npol lia maka klernohor reri re na'nama Nwaliri-nwalioh nana riy termida wehrani woru la ' hare honona . Noma Npolga hare la Mak Ha Nwalir niana pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . La ' hare honona nanni de erti la ,
Simon , whom he also named Peter , Andrew , his brother , James , John , Philip , Bartholomew , ||| Simon , mak Yesus Nal walia nanni Petrus , me Simon hyalli de Andarias . Nwalir walia Yakowsi me Yohansi , Pilipsu , me Bartolomeus ,
Matthew , Thomas , James the son of Alphaeus , Simon who was called the Zealot , ||| Matius , me Tomsa , Yakowsi , de Alpius a'nani , me Simon maka ha rweta la riy mak kwayotil memna hairi Romawi rodi plolli la Israel ,
Judas the son of James , and Judas Iscariot , who also became a traitor . ||| la'pa Yudas , de Yakowsi a'nani , me Yudas Iskariot , maka na'olga Yesus .
He came down with them and stood on a level place , with a crowd of his disciples and a great number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon , who came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases , ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nora makodia E lirni-tunnu re rerun rewre'wa pa rtutrier lia la ' a mtatanni ida . La ' hande mana rirahu maklernohor reria liawanni er wal lia me rira liawanni mak kwatiawua meni-meni to ' a , la ' a Yudea liewnu , Yerusalem , me la leta-let mak kden la Tirus me Sidon la eni wawannu .
as well as those who were troubled by unclean spirits , and they were being healed . ||| Honona rmai totpena ratlin la Yesus me totpena nnienni re mana Yesus Nhi ' kalwied walia . Me la ' a riy meni maka hegana-kawnu , yatni-rha'ani rhu'ru ralma mana Yesus Nhokar doinia la .
All the multitude sought to touch him , for power came out of him and healed them all . ||| Riy honona rahak pa rho ' a-rhaiya Yesus , yoma la ' inonni de e Nodialgota plola-mneha pa Nhi ' kalwieda ir honona .
He lifted up his eyes to his disciples , and said , Blessed are you who are poor , for God 's Kingdom is yours . ||| Yesus Nlina-nmata maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re noma Nakot la re Niwra , Hyal miy re , hota unut lawna la ' a miy mak kler la kleha-lara , yoma miy di de mrie ' teman la Uplerlawna horatni-hairni limni-rorni maka Enodi plolli la emeka Ray .
Blessed are you who hunger now , for you will be filled . Blessed are you who weep now , for you will laugh . ||| Hyal miy re , hota unut lawna la ' a miy miak kakleha-kaplara , yoma hota mliernana penpuenu-tetema la ' a Uplerlawna pa ralammi namtiernu ! Hota unut lawna la mak ko ' a-khera miy de yoma hota Uplerlawna Nal miy pia mimlier la he ' i-hepru .
Blessed are you when men hate you , and when they exclude and mock you , and throw out your name as evil , for the Son of Man 's sake . ||| Hyal miy re , hota mlier la unut lawna yoma riy rahankeran tiy miy , rwayotil miy , riy rahe ' i-ramal miy , onde rapupu-raher miy , yoma la ' Rimormior A'nani A rerie'yu .
Rejoice in that day and leap for joy , for behold , your reward is great in heaven , for their fathers did the same thing to the prophets . ||| Yoma la ' ululu nek de Yahudi upni-tgarni rhi ' emkade wali la makwohorulu-ktatrulu . Pede la'pa hihi ' a-yapyapi re rodi liarni pa mimliernan walia , de yana ralammi rmawla , mere mlioi-mhiek nohora he'emi-heparmi , yoma miy siepmi-kaimi inpona la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha Sorga maka hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala tiy miy .
But woe to you who are rich ! For you have received your consolation . ||| Mere makre ' a-ktaru miy lia ' dodo'ondi , de hota mimlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , yoma mimliernan oleka rehenu lawanni .
Woe to you , you who are full now , for you will be hungry . Woe to you who laugh now , for you will mourn and weep . ||| Mak kler la ya'an penpuenu-tetema la ' dodo'ondi de hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani yoma rehka-lara . Miy maka kahepuepru la dodo'ondi de hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , yoma hota mlier la ralam mawla , ne koko ' a-kakakarmi .
Woe , when men speak well of you , for their fathers did the same thing to the false prophets . ||| La'pa rirahu ra'uli miy , de hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , yoma emkade walia , la ululu de miy upmi-tgarmi ra'uli makwohorulu-ktatrulu putputra-palpalka .
But I tell you who hear , love your enemies , do good to those who hate you , ||| Mere la'pa mak katlin la A lia dodo'ondi , de mitlina A nnio ' u di ! Hota mira ' a-mipalga miy arwalmi me mhi ' samomuoga riy maka kahankeran rer tiy miy .
bless those who curse you , and pray for those who mistreat you . ||| Mpiak la Uplerlawna pa Ntera-ndema maka klokra-khaut miy me msiumbainia riy maka khi ' yatyat miy .
To him who strikes you on the cheek , offer also the other , and from him who takes away your cloak , do n't withhold your coat also . ||| La'pa riy rpahara kilmi malganna , de miala kilmi walli malwiru pa npahar walia . La'pa rwak nana miy raini plalahwami de miolin doin walia rain rialammi pa ra ' wal lia .
Give to everyone who asks you , and do n't ask him who takes away your goods to give them back again . ||| La'pa riy rwak hadom tiy miy , de miala la , ne la'pa rwarui miy gahami , de yana mpiak neka wa .
As you would like people to do to you , do exactly so to them . ||| Mhi ' samomuou rira de emekwalima mimiwra irhi ' samomuou tiy miy .
If you love those who love you , what credit is that to you ? For even sinners love those who love them . ||| Yoma la'pa mira ' a-mipalga , mtiulla-msiayn to ' a maka nhi'inde kara ' a-kapalga , ktulla-ksayn miy de hota Uplerlawna edonna Na'uli-nawedi miy . Riy maka khi ' do ' a-hala nek de rara ' a-rapalu , rtulla-rsayn walia riy maka kara ' a-kapalga , ktulla-ksayni ira toh !
If you do good to those who do good to you , what credit is that to you ? For even sinners do the same . ||| Ne la'pa mimhi ' samomuounu to'ola riy maka khi ' samomuou tiy miy , de hota Uplerlawna edonna Na'uli-nawedi miy . Riy mak khi ' a do ' a-hala nek de rhi ' samomuou wal lia mutwualli toh !
If you lend to those from whom you hope to receive , what credit is that to you ? Even sinners lend to sinners , to receive back as much . ||| Ne la'pa mimial to ' a kupan la ' riy maka ka'otan pa hota nhernia , de hota Uplerlawna edonna Na'uli-nawedi miy . Riy maka khi ' do ' a-hala nek de nal walia kupan pa mutwualli ra'otna , nanpena nwak owa'an nhierannu la !
But love your enemies , and do good , and lend , expecting nothing back , and your reward will be great , and you will be children of the Most High , for he is kind toward the unthankful and evil . ||| Mere rwaldioinia de , miatu mira ' a-mipalga miy arwalmi ne mhi ' kalwiedweda re . Mialla ra'otna me miy edon mpiaror nana hota nherni owa'ana . Yoma la'pa emkade , de hota miy siepmi-kaimi inponni ne hota mtiutga la ilmi-wniehwami de Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni , upni-a'nani miy . Yoma Uplerlawan de Ntutga ralam kalwiedni la riy maka kaplinu kwak kalwieda la E ' a me la ' walia riy yatyatni .
Therefore be merciful , even as your Father is also merciful . ||| Pede mhi ' a nhioli-lieta kalwiedwed la ' a rimormior wialmi pa emekwalima Uplerlawna , miy Amlawanmi de mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nden rer lia kalwiedwedni .
Do n't judge , and you wo n't be judged . Do n't condemn , and you wo n't be condemned . Set free , and you will be set free . ||| Yana plet pa mpiaghala rimormior wialmi totpena Uplerlawna mana edonna Nhudi-npar miy . Yana mtio'on reria riy la do ' a-hala wawna totpena Uplerlawna mana yana Nto'on wali miy ! Mere mhioratdoinia rira do'oni-halli tiy miy totpena miy miana , Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna miy la do'omi-halmi .
Give , and it will be given to you , good measure , pressed down , shaken together , and running over , will be given to you . For with the same measure you measure it will be measured back to you . ||| Mialla ' rira totpena Uplerlawna mana Nal tiy miy de narehi-nalawna . Hota rtailia penpuenu tetem oleka miy gahami wa , yoma tatiaili maka ha mniairi pa ma mtiail pa mialla rira , de hota Uplerlawna na Ntail pa Nala tiy miy .
He spoke a parable to them . Can the blind guide the blind ? Wo n't they both fall into a pit ? ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot nohor owa'ana yawalliohora id owa'an la ira totpena yana plet pa rwaghal rimormior wialli , Niwra , La'pa mak matni kyata ida ni'it la mat yat walli , de hota nahmenmen nanama , rora rewre'wa pa rtuin la hu'ula ralamni .
A disciple is not above his teacher , but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his teacher . ||| A'n iskola edonna nareh dioin tungkurnu . Mere la'pa a'n iskol de nhi ' ahorga iskolli de hota emekwalima e tungkurnu .
Why do you see the speck of chaff that is in your brother 's eye , but do n't consider the beam that is in your own eye ? ||| Hya ' mak karei pia mpiaghala mutwualmi onnila do'oni-halli mak edon kwerta mere miy do'omi-halmi nekane lawan rehia . La'pa mhi ' emkade , de emekwalima mimkek nana ai liu'wu mak kdella mutwualmi de matni ralamni , ne ai dieulu naniewat la miy mat wamueheni ralamni mere miy edonna mimkek nana .
Or how can you tell your brother , ‘ Brother , let me remove the speck of chaff that is in your eye , ' when you yourself do n't see the beam that is in your own eye ? You hypocrite ! First remove the beam from your own eye , and then you can see clearly to remove the speck of chaff that is in your brother 's eye . ||| Ralma-riormi emkameni pa mikot la mutwualmi miwra , Mai pia agal doinia ai liu'wu mak kden la o matmu de , mere miy orgahami miplin niek la ai dieulu de e naniewat la miy matni mere miy edon mimkek nana ? ! Hoi ! Yana mtiota miy inonmi la riy kalwiedweda mere plollolli de riy yatyat miy . Milgot ulga ai dieulu mak kden la miy matmi de totpena mimkek samomuoga ai liu'wu mak kden la mutwualmi de matni pa milgota .
For there is no good tree that produces rotten fruit , nor again a rotten tree that produces good fruit . ||| Au muaka kpoti-kadwu de edonna nawo ' a wo ' kilta-watra me emkade walia au muaka khoptutu-khoplera , edonna na'unu-nayeh nohora wo ' samomuou .
For each tree is known by its own fruit . For people do n't gather figs from thorns , nor do they gather grapes from a bramble bush . ||| La'pa tlernana au id wo'oni de itat niohor oleka ha onni wa . Edonna rlernana kar wo ' a la ' au rururi-karkiarti ralamni , me edonna rlernan walia lokrah wio ' a la ' a ruwnu-penta ralamni .
The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings out that which is good , and the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings out that which is evil , for out of the abundance of the heart , his mouth speaks . ||| Hota emkade walia riy maka ralamni kalwieda-paitiota , de hota ntutga nhioli-lieta kalwieda-paitiota yoma ihranu ralamni npenpuenu tetema la kalwieda-paitiota . Ne riy yatyata-halala nampena nodgiota nhioli-lieta yatyata yoma yatyatni-halalli nagengen lia e ' a . Yoma la ' a hya ' maka klergot la it nurnu de ha nwatiawua it ihranu ralamni .
Why do you call me , ‘ Lord , Lord , ' and do n't do the things which I say ? ||| Nihya'pa mimpiolga A ' die , Matroma , Matroma ! Mere miy edonna mliernohora hya ' ed maka A'ukota tiy miy ? !
Everyone who comes to me , and hears my words and does them , I will show you who he is like . ||| Hota Agala yawalliohora id pa A'ukot nohora riy mak kmai A ' u re , ne la'pa ratlina A li'ru de rlernohor reria .
He is like a man building a house , who dug and went deep and laid a foundation on the rock . When a flood arose , the stream broke against that house , and could not shake it , because it was founded on the rock . ||| Maklernohor reri A li'ru re , de emekwalima riy mak hota kariria roma de nahia kdieldelma , na'nama nwatatga la watu wawannu . Pa la'pa gera nwau me ger wawuau liawna nwayotil la rom de , de edonna nwo'la-nwaini , yoma e rwatatga la watu wawannu .
But he who hears and does n't do , is like a man who built a house on the earth without a foundation , against which the stream broke , and immediately it fell , and the ruin of that house was great . ||| Mere riy maka katlina A li'ru-tu'nu ne edonna nlernohora , de emekwalia riy maka kariria romni de edonna e rwatatga la watu wawannu , pede la'pa ger wawuau liawna nwayotil la roma de nleretniekla napru'wu la yawa ne pala patia !
After he had finished speaking in the hearing of the people , he entered into Capernaum . ||| La'pa Nwatia lirni la ' a hya ' maka Ha Nakot nohora la ' a riy harahu re , dewade Yesus Nla'awa la leta Kapernaum .
A certain centurion 's servant , who was dear to him , was sick and at the point of death . ||| La ' hande de , de riy ida makhi ' o'ta-mat la makodi keki-rautu Roma rahu ida . Riy de lili'irnu-hopopanni maka nhi'inde ha nsayni ida e namehra werwerta .
When he heard about Jesus , he sent to him elders of the Jews , asking him to come and save his servant . ||| La'pa makodi keki-rautu o'tani de natlin nan de Yesus etla hande , dewade nhopna Yahudi in letni-am letni wo'ir pa rla rpolga Yesus totpena Nmai pia Nhi ' kalwieda e hopopanni de .
When they came to Jesus , they begged him earnestly , saying , He is worthy for you to do this for him , ||| La'pa rte'ela Yesus de noma rhu'ru-rhelam pa rwak toto ' meman la Yesus totpa Nla Ntulan la makodi keki-rautu o'tani de . Rakot la Yesus riwra , Amee ! Hota lol talanni pa Mtiulan la makodi keki-rautu o'tani de yoma riy samomuou e ' a !
for he loves our nation , and he built our synagogue for us . ||| Yoma hade ed maka khi ' samomuoga it luwnu-a'nani ne nariria roma id maka itsi ' krei-iskola .
Jesus went with them . When he was now not far from the house , the centurion sent friends to him , saying to him , Lord , do n't trouble yourself , for I am not worthy for you to come under my roof . ||| Pede Yesus Nor rewre'wa re pa rla'awa . La'pa Yesus Nhi ' pa Nwakrian lia rom de , noma makodi keki-rautu o'tani de nhopan doinia e mutwualli rla ' rwatroma pa ratutga Yesus totpa yana Yesus Nla ' a makodi keki-rautu o'tani romni de . Makodi keki-rautu o'tani lirni de emkadilla Yesus , Tuna , yana miodi liarmu la a ro'mu nayanni yoma a ' g edon lia ' nana Tuna lewatni pa Tuna Nmai lia a ro'mu nayanni .
Therefore I did n't even think myself worthy to come to you , but say the word , and my servant will be healed . ||| La ' hade pede a ' u mana edon puaran pia ama wuatrom Tuna . Pen neka Tuna Nden nek la handi mere Nodi plolli pa Nhopna a hopopnu de nkalwieda la roma nayanni .
For I also am a man placed under authority , having under myself soldiers . I tell this one , ‘ Go ! ' and he goes , and to another , ‘ Come ! ' and he comes , and to my servant , ‘ Do this , ' and he does it . ||| Yoma a ' niek de utlin la mak kodi plolli mai a ' u . Ne la ' a a tniornu de ratlin mai a ' u . Aghopan pa makodi keki-rautu ida nla'awa de hota nler pa nla'awa . Apuolga dom de , hota rmai . Ne la ' walia aghopan pa a hopopnu de nhi ' hya ' to ' a de hota nlernohora .
When Jesus heard these things , he marveled at him , and turned and said to the multitude who followed him , I tell you , I have not found such great faith , no , not in Israel . ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin ha lirni de Yesus mana Nwer rer wiawni yoma makodi keki-rautu o'tani pesiayni de . Noma Nkillia mak kden hande honona mak klernohor reria na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , riy di de riy Israel atia ' a id walia di me ! Mpiesiaya ! La ' a riy Israel re honona nekane A ' g edonna liernan ma'ta riy maka pesiayni naruri emeka riy mak Israel atia ' di !
Those who were sent , returning to the house , found that the servant who had been sick was well . ||| La'pa mak ha rhopna re rawali owa'an la makodi keki-rautu o'tani romni de li'iru-hopopan de mana nkalwied olekwa .
Soon afterwards , he went to a city called Nain . Many of his disciples , along with a great multitude , went with him . ||| La'pa edonna nalo'on wali ne Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , me riy rahu wal pia ror rewre'wa Yesus pa rokria leta Nain .
Now when he came near to the gate of the city , behold , one who was dead was carried out , the only born son of his mother , and she was a widow . Many people of the city were with her . ||| La'pa Yesus Nhi ' pa Nte'ela letlawna puohrani onni de rwatrom nan neka riy rakwar nana loi mati pa rlergot wal lia puohra leta . Matia maka ha riwra rla rtamin de , de patyata ida a'nani muanke ' a memeh ' a inhatta toto ' a . Rira liawanni mak kden la let de , rlernohor reria patyat de .
When the Lord saw her , he had compassion on her and said to her , Do n't cry . ||| La'pa Itmatromni Yesus Namkek tutga patke ' de dewade Yesus ralamni nmolu-nhelam doin la pa nakot la Niwra , Yana Nkakru ina !
He came near and touched the coffin , and the bearers stood still . He said , Young man , I tell you , arise ! ||| La ' noma Yesus Nla Nwakriania mak kgolan mati re na'nama Nteman la loi miat die , dewade mak kgolan mati re mana rtut tiaru . Dewade Niwra , Hei ! Tuwari-lawe'ru nee , A ' g e umat o ' a !
He who was dead sat up and began to speak . Then he gave him to his mother . ||| Dewade plin-plinnianamde tuwari-lawer muaka kmati olekwa de namat pa namtatna ne nwahaur wa . Noma Yesus Nakot la inni Niwra , Ina , o a'namu nmori oleka di pa muodi mlia'awa !
Fear took hold of all , and they glorified God , saying , A great prophet has arisen among us ! and , God has visited his people ! ||| Riy honona mak kden la hande ramta'at wenna ne rleretniekla ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna . Noma idma nakot la ida riwra , Hadi de makwohorulu-ktatrulu inponni id hadi , pa Nhari oleka inonni mai it wa ! Ee ! Uplerlawna Ntutg olek plolli-mneheni pa Ntulan la mutnu-rahanu it wa .
This report went out concerning him in the whole of Judea and in all the surrounding region . ||| Rakot nohora Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni la Yudea uhunu-ewatni-lahwani me nodi liarni la ' geni-tien mak kden la hande pa lolda-lolda .
The disciples of John told him about all these things . ||| Maklernohor reria Yohansi rma rakot la Yohansi la ' a hya ' maka Yesus Nhi ' a-nyapia .
John , calling to himself two of his disciples , sent them to Jesus , saying , Are you the one who is coming , or should we look for another ? ||| Noma Yohansi nhopan doinia riy wor pua rla ratian nohora Itmatromni Yesus . E ' de maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru onde rwei mia'ta riy dom to ' a ?
When the men had come to him , they said , John the Baptizer has sent us to you , saying , ‘ Are you he who comes , or should we look for another ? ' ||| Noma rla ' pa rlernohora Yohansi lirni pa riwra , Tuna , Yohansi makharani nhopna ama matian O ' a , de O ' di ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa O maimiaimu ? Me yanpa maka ampei-mnara de riy dom to ' a ?
In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and evil spirits , and to many who were blind he gave sight . ||| La ' ler de , de Yesus e Nhi ' kalwieda rirahu mak kanieni-kahniena mak kamehra-kamau , me Nhokar doinia yatni-rha'ani la ' riy me Nhi ' a rirahu matni mak kyata pa ramkek owa'ana .
Jesus answered them , Go and tell John the things which you have seen and heard , that the blind receive their sight , the lame walk , the lepers are cleansed , the deaf hear , the dead are raised up , and the poor have good news preached to them . ||| Pede Yesus Nwalolla mak ha rhopan doinia Niwra , Hyal miy re , miwali owa'an la Yohansi pa mpiahaur nohora la ' a hya ' ed maka mitlin me mimkeka , de riy maka matni kyata ramkeka , maka lakni nmati rala'awa , maka ulatni temni yata rkalwied wa , maka hatilu mana ratlina , mak kmati olekwa mana rmori owa'ana , me Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna mana rakot nohora la maka kakleha-kaplara .
Blessed is he who finds no occasion for stumbling in me . ||| Ne la'pa riy honona mak edonna kwayotli A ' u , mere npesiay niek wa , hota rlernana unut lawna .
When John 's messengers had departed , he began to tell the multitudes about John , What did you go out into the wilderness to see ? A reed shaken by the wind ? ||| Nhorwua noma maka Yohansi nhopna re rawal wia , noma Yesus Nwahaur nohora Yohansi la ' a riy rahu mak kden hande . Yesus Niwra , La ' ler ululu de miy e mlia ' a wo'orletna-kawurloini totpena mimkeka hya ' a ? Mpiahaka riy id maka o'tani wolwo'la pa emeknekama wewna lihira maka anni ha nten dioinia rena ?
But what did you go out to see ? A man clothed in soft clothing ? Behold , those who are gorgeously dressed and live delicately are in kings ' courts . ||| Mlia ' de mpiahaka hya ' a pa mimkeka ? Mpiahaka riy ida maka naniairi samomuounu me nmori-ndar niohora re'eni-tniarnu ? Riy mak emkare , ha rden la tuna ray romni-lewnu !
But what did you go out to see ? A prophet ? Yes , I tell you , and much more than a prophet . ||| Pede mlia ' de mpiahaka hya ' pa mimkeka ? Mlia ' pa mpiahaka makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida toh ? ! Ha naplola . Ne hota Yohansi nek de nareh dioinia makwohorulu-ktatrulu re .
This is he of whom it is written , ‘ Behold , I send my messenger before your face , who will prepare your way before you . ' ||| Yoma la ' Puka ralamni , de Uplerlawna Nakot nohora Yohansi kniarni , Niwra , Mhioratreria ! Hadi ed maka Aghopna . Hota Aghopna hade pa nala ' ulg O ' a totpena nwahyar tialan pa Omliola .
For I tell you , among those who are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptizer , yet he who is least in God 's Kingdom is greater than he . ||| Mhioratreria ! La ' ululu la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ler di la ' nohkeran di wawannu de riy id mana edonna nareh dioinia Yohansi makharani . Mere la'pa la ' lera-mela ri , maka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka Ray de , E mutnu-rahanu mak kakleha weli id ho'mana nlernan yara ' a-yapalu nareh dioinia maka Yohansi nlernana .
When all the people and the tax collectors heard this , they declared God to be just , having been baptized with John 's baptism . ||| Riy harahu re la'pa ratlin nana Yesus lirni de ir er maka kreiniana Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Mak kawoka blastena nekane rreinian walia . Ir honona rreiniana yoma ir er maka Yohansi nharania re la ' ler ululu !
But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God , not being baptized by him themselves . ||| Mere riy Parisi rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rahmena-rapraiya Uplerlawna wniarorni-wnialaini la ' a ir inonni . Yoma ir er maka rahal olek inonni la Yohansi yanpa nharania ira .
To what then should I compare the people of this generation ? What are they like ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'ana Niwra , Hota Agala yawalliohora hya ' pa ga ' ukot nohora rimormiori mak edon kpesiay A ' u la lera-mela rina ?
They are like children who sit in the marketplace and call to one another , saying , ‘ We piped to you , and you did n't dance . We mourned , and you did n't weep . ' ||| Ir de emolmolla keke'enku ' a woka id mak kamtatna la ' a ya'olgeni pa rpol lia wokni handina yoma idma edonna nlernohora id lirni , pede riwra , Amnairi floiti me tiwla-prai pa amahe ' i-mahepur nohor miy mere miy edonna mlioi-mhieka ! Ampahniar nohor miy la ' a nhiara matmiati-molmuolu mere miy edon mkio ' a-mkiakru !
For John the Baptizer came neither eating bread nor drinking wine , and you say , ‘ He has a demon . ' ||| Hade emekwali Yohansi makharani nmai die noma natahan lara puasa . Me edonna nemni anggur turnu . Ne mimiwra hegana e nhu'ru ralma .
The Son of Man has come eating and drinking , and you say , ‘ Behold , a glutton and a drunkard , a friend of tax collectors and sinners ! ' ||| Noma dodo'ondi Rimormior A'na A ' Muai die , de A'una-gemnu . Noma mikot la mai a ' u miwra , Tamkek to'ola hade . Ya'ante'eni , ne ma'wanu de , pa la ' nor wutga mak kawoka blastena me riy yatyata-halala rwatamputu .
Wisdom is justified by all her children . ||| Mere la'pa miy mpiayotlia Agora Yohansi hihi'ini-yapyapni ho'mana Uplerlawna kirkirni-ralma-rior samomuounu mak amlernohora de hota nayamkek la riy mak klernohora A wniatut mamni re nhiolli-lietni ilu-wniehwani samomuounu .
One of the Pharisees invited him to eat with him . He entered into the Pharisee 's house and sat at the table . ||| Lera ida ne Simon , riy Parisi ida , npolu-nwaka Yesus pa Nma pa ra'an rewre'wa . Noma Yesus Nla ' a Simon romni nayanni pa rawok pa ra'ana-remun wutu .
Behold , a woman in the city who was a sinner , when she knew that he was reclining in the Pharisee 's house , brought an alabaster jar of ointment . ||| La ' a let de , de patke ' yatyata ida nhol wial lia hande . La'pa patke ' de natlin tutga Yesus entepartarlia ya'ana-yemnu la ' a riy Parisi die romni nayanni , noma nmai die nod miemna wu'ru hup mikmikri la ' a potla id ralamni mak ha rhi ' nana la watu-watu mak welli werta .
Standing behind at his feet weeping , she began to wet his feet with her tears , and she wiped them with the hair of her head , kissed his feet , and anointed them with the ointment . ||| Nmai nioma ntutrier lia Yesus to'orni la ' lakni onni na'nama nko ' a-nkakur pa luini-nuhranu nape'era-napahia Yesus lakni , noma nala moratnu na naha kerna luini-nuhranu della Yesus lakni nhorwua noma nkinnia na'nama nhuria wu'ru della .
Now when the Pharisee who had invited him saw it , he said to himself , This man , if he were a prophet , would have perceived who and what kind of woman this is who touches him , that she is a sinner . ||| La'pa riy Parisi mak kpolu-kwaka Yesus ramkek nana patke ' de hihi'ini-yapyapni de noma nwaror la ralamni niwra , La'pa Yesus de plol toto ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu id hade , de hota Natg oleka patke ' meni ed maka kheik la E de ! Yoma patke ' yatyata ida de .
Jesus answered him , Simon , I have something to tell you . He said , Teacher , say on . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Simon Niwra , Simon , A ' g e giwra ukot hadom tiy o ' a . Noma Simon niwra , Mukota tungkurga !
A certain lender had two debtors . The one owed five hundred denarii , and the other fifty . ||| Dewade Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Riy worga e ra'otan kupan la ' a riy ida . Riy id e na'otna kupna-kai gaji la lera rahu wolima gahani , ne mutwualli de na'otan walia kupna-kai la lera terampwolima gahani .
When they could n't pay , he forgave them both . Which of them therefore will love him most ? ||| La'pa nte'ela lerni maka ha rakot taru pa rpolla kupna re noma edonna rpolan nana yoma rakleh kupan wa . Mere orgahi edonna nto'ona ne nleretniekla nhap dioinia otanni re . Pede ompuaror teka ! Hota hameni ed maka ralamni etla riy maka kal otan kupna rena ?
Simon answered , He , I suppose , to whom he forgave the most . He said to him , You have judged correctly . ||| Noma Simona nwet la niwra , La ' a wniaro'ru de , mak ralamni etla riy de wa de mak ka'otna kupna liawanni . Noma Yesus Niwra , O ralma-riormu plola !
Turning to the woman , he said to Simon , Do you see this woman ? I entered into your house , and you gave me no water for my feet , but she has wet my feet with her tears , and wiped them with the hair of her head . ||| Dewade Yesus Nkillia pat de , na'nama nakot la Simon Niwra , Mumkek to'ola patke ' de , Simona . Ompuak pa Amuai , mere o edonna mpuahi ' ger dom pa Agalla wuri-gohma A la'ku pa emeknekama nhi'inde itsi ' nana , mere pat di nala luini-nuhranu na nohma A la'ku ne nala moratnu na naha kerna .
You gave me no kiss , but she , since the time I came in , has not ceased to kiss my feet . ||| Dodo'ona Amuai die , o ' edonna mkinni A ' u pa mpuak kalwieda mai A ' u pa emeknekama nhi'inde itsi ' nana . Mere pat di nkinin la ' a-mai A la'ku la ' dodo'on memna .
You did n't anoint my head with oil , but she has anointed my feet with ointment . ||| O edonna mhu'ru-mhuelam la mai A lia muala wu'ru dom pa ma muneg A ' u , mere pat di nhuri oleka wu'ru hup mikmikri la ' A la'ku .
Therefore I tell you , her sins , which are many , are forgiven , for she loved much . But one to whom little is forgiven , loves little . ||| Pede , ompuesiaya , plola la hade nhiolli-lietni kalwiedwed de mai A ' u , ntutga de do'oni-halli mutliawanni re ramou-rawitna olekwa ! Yoma hota la'pa rira do'oni-halli oke ' a nmeh ' a noma rhap dioinia de hota riy die ntutga ralam kalwieda oke ' a nmeh ' a . Mere la'pa rira do'oni-halli mutliawanni re e ramou-rawitna , de riy de ntutga ralam kalwiedwed meman wa .
He said to her , Your sins are forgiven . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la pat de Niwra , Ina , o ' do'omu-halmu ramou-rawitna momuog oleka wa .
Those who sat at the table with him began to say to themselves , Who is this who even forgives sins ? ||| Dewade riy honona mak ka'an wut lia Yesus la hande idma nakot la ida riwra , Hota he ' eda riy di pede Nparan pia Niwra Namou-nawitna do ' a-halo ?
He said to the woman , Your faith has saved you . Go in peace . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la patke ' de Niwra , Yoma la o pesiaymu mai A ' u ina , pede omlier olek la mormiori-lewlewna . Mlier olek la kalwiedni-paitiotni pa mlia'awa !
Soon afterwards , he went about through cities and villages , preaching and bringing the good news of God 's Kingdom . With him were the twelve , ||| Noma la la'pa Yesus Nokria leta-ruhuna re , pa Nakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni , Niwra Uplerlawna hota Nodi plolli emekneka Ray . Ne maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy termida wehrani woru re , ror rewre'wa E ' talla .
and certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities , Mary who was called Magdalene , from whom seven demons had gone out , ||| Emkade walia la ' a patke ' dom maka Yesus Nhi ' kalwied oleka la yatni-rha'ani ha rhu'ru ralma , me mak kler la nnieni-nhiena korni , pa rkalwied olekwa . Patke ' mak kler nohor reria de Maria maka nhi'inde ha rpol wualia la Magdalena , maka Yesus Nhokar doinia yatni-rha'ani wo'itu la inonni ,
and Joanna , the wife of Chuzas , Herod 's steward , Susanna , and many others who served them from their possessions . ||| me Yohana , Khusa makla ' o'tani la mak kar lia ray Herodes nhiol genni , hawni de , me Susan , ror wut wualia patke ' liawanni dom pali . Rlernohor Yesus de rnairia kupna-kai wamueheni pa ra rhima-rre ' nohora Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re .
When a great multitude came together and people from every city were coming to him , he spoke by a parable , ||| Rira liawanni rwatiawua leta-leta re rapur pa rma rahaka Yesus . Ne la'pa rawok taru , na'nama Yesus Nakot nohora yawalliohor dilla , Niwra ,
The farmer went out to sow his seed . As he sowed , some fell along the road , and it was trampled under foot , and the birds of the sky devoured it . ||| Mak kanhyi ' a-katlunni ida nla ' pa nrinnia winni-hgonni la nhyi'ini . La'pa nrinnia wini-hgona re dom de rtuin la talla ralamni . Pa wini die riy rhapar nana , dewade onu-ma'nu rmai pia rtotan nan momuoga .
Other seed fell on the rock , and as soon as it grew , it withered away , because it had no moisture . ||| Ne la ' dom de rtuin la watwuatnu pa la'pa rmor die nleretniekla rapliau yoma tani pahna .
Other fell amid the thorns , and the thorns grew with it and choked it . ||| La ' walia dom de rtuin tar lia pu'na-kiarti ralamni pede rmor riewre'wa wut lia pa narieiniande idma natolaw wenwen ida pede ta'en niana rmori plollola .
Other fell into the good ground and grew and produced one hundred times as much fruit . As he said these things , he called out , He who has ears to hear , let him hear ! ||| Mere dom de rtuin la tan ihi pa rmor die rpoti-rkadwu me ra'unu-rayeh nohora wo'oni rahg ida . La'pa Nakot nohora yawalliohor de pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot owa'an la Niwra , La'pa miy tlinmi erla de , mitlin reri !
Then his disciples asked him , What does this parable mean ? ||| Maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana riwra , Tuna , la ' yawalliohora di nnia'eratni de emkame ?
He said , To you it is given to know the mysteries of God 's Kingdom , but to the rest it is given in parables , that ‘ seeing they may not see , and hearing they may not understand . ' ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Uplerlawna Nhu'ula tlinmi-nwe'er matmi totpena miat niohora la hya ' ed maka riy raplin niohor ma'ta la ' a Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu . Mere rala yawalliohora ra rwatutga riy mak kakleha pesiay , totpena , Hota iramkek reria , mere emkade ho'mana edonna rna'erit nana hota hya ' ed maka ha ramkeka , hota iratlin reria mere emkade ho'mana raplinu-raplo ' nohora .
Now the parable is this , The seed is the word of God . ||| Mere la ' a yawalliohora de nnia'eratni de emkadilla , Wini-hgona , de Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu irhatta .
Those along the road are those who hear , then the devil comes and takes away the word from their heart , that they may not believe and be saved . ||| Wini-hgon maka ktuin la talla ralamni de emekwalima mak katlin oleka lira-tun diewa , mere hota hegana amlawanni nmai pia nwarui-nwate'la nana lira-tun diella mak katlin oleka re totpa yana rpesiaya pa hota edonna rlernan walia mormiori-lewlewna .
Those on the rock are they who , when they hear , receive the word with joy , but these have no root . They believe for a while , then fall away in time of temptation . ||| Mak ktuin la watwuatnu de emeknekama riy maka katlin nana lira kalwiedwed de dewade leretniekla ralamni raplele'er pa rreiniana mere edonna naga'ara la ' a ir ihranu ralamni . Rpesiay tio'ola lera ho'ke'eni de to ' a , ne la'pa hegana amlawanni nma nta'aga dewade rwaldioinia pa edonna rpesiay owa'ana .
What fell among the thorns , these are those who have heard , and as they go on their way they are choked with cares , riches , and pleasures of life , and they bring no fruit to maturity . ||| Wini-hgon mak ktuin la ruwnu-ahla pu'na-kiarti de emeknekama riy maka katlin nana lir de , mere ralamni worwuorga yanpa hota e ruk lia re'eni-tniarnu la noha wawannu onde rwaror nohor mamaini la hya ' maka ir ralamni nala pa narieiniande ir pesiayni edon la ' ga ' a , pa emeknekama wini-hgon mak edon rawo ' nan walia ha'ola-hawo ' a mak kerna-kgatna .
Those in the good ground , these are those who with an honest and good heart , having heard the word , hold it tightly , and produce fruit with perseverance . ||| Mere wini-hgona mak ktuin la tan ihi , hota emeknekama riy maka plele'era me kalwiedweda . Iratlin nan Uplerlawna lirni de ne rkenia la ralamni , ne rhi ' nohor neka pa rlol kalwiedwedni .
No one , when he has lit a lamp , covers it with a container or puts it under a bed , but puts it on a stand , that those who enter in may see the light . ||| Edonna rlernan ma'ta riy rtutin wa'du nanpena rala ktopra ra rkadwua pitpitga , onde rwatatga wa'du della ' lewnu nayanni . Wa'du de rkeni hadella la ' a wniatatgenni totpena hameni maka kler la roma ralamni de namkek reria lelerni .
For nothing is hidden that will not be revealed , nor anything secret that will not be known and come to light . ||| Emkade walia la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , yoma E lirni mak kayade ' a honona re mana hota nayamkek wa , me mak kayawunmu momuou hota nawnie'era ne nat niohor memna .
Be careful therefore how you hear . For whoever has , to him will be given , and whoever does n't have , from him will be taken away even that which he thinks he has . ||| La ' hade pede mpiahniorat la hya ' a maka A'ukota ri , yoma la riy mak kiwra kna'erit nana , de hota ra'itr owa'an la wniarorni-wnialaini mere la'pa riy maka kahmena kat niohora Uplerlawna lirni , de hya ' mak ha nwarora de enatg oleka de hota Uplerlawna Na ' owa'ana .
His mother and brothers came to him , and they could not come near him for the crowd . ||| Yesus inni nora a'nani korni rmai Yesus de , mere ta'en niana rwakriania Yesus yoma riy rahu rehia .
Some people told him , Your mother and your brothers stand outside , desiring to see you . ||| Noma riy dom de e rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , Tuna inni nora ammu-hyalmu e rtutrier lia tio'ora ! E riwra rora O ' a rwatroma .
But he answered them , My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it . ||| Mere Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora pa Nakot nohora pleini la ira . Niwra , Riy meni maka katlina-katailla Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , me nlernohora , de ir er maka Aghi ' a la A i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu .
Now on one of those days , he entered into a boat , himself and his disciples , and he said to them , Let 's go over to the other side of the lake . So they launched out . ||| La'pa la'awa lera ida noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Mai pia todia puou pa tla'awa danau de walli . Noma honona rha'at la puou pa rla'awa .
But as they sailed , he fell asleep . A wind storm came down on the lake , and they were taking on dangerous amounts of water . ||| La ' pa rhopopal reri ne Yesus nanin hala . Plinu-plinnianama kakmoran lawna nte'prernia la ' danau de , pa yo'orni-ananni nwakloli-nwaklalia puou me yo'or mana rriw lia puou ralamni pa npenpuen lia tah ' i .
They came to him and awoke him , saying , Master , Master , we are dying ! He awoke and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water , then they ceased , and it was calm . ||| Dewade maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rla ramat doin Yesus riwra , Tungkurga ee ! Hota itmati ! Dewade Yesus Namat pa Nkamot targa yo'ora-anin lawan de dewade nleretniekla nalina-nalera la ' a danau de ralamni .
He said to them , Where is your faith ? Being afraid , they marveled , saying to one another , Who is this then , that he commands even the winds and the water , and they obey him ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Nihya'pa miy edonna mpiesiay A ' u ? Ir honona rwer rer wiawni me ramta'at wenna , noma idma nakot la ida riwra , Riy di de he ' a pede lirni-yatnu natutga yo'ora-anni me yo'ora-anni mana ratlina-ratailla ?
Then they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes , which is opposite Galilee . ||| Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhopal pa rodi liarni la ' a riy Gerasa genni-tienni , la ' danau Galilea walli .
When Jesus stepped ashore , a certain man out of the city who had demons for a long time met him . He wore no clothes , and did n't live in a house , but in the tombs . ||| La'pa Yesus Nerun la keranni , dewade muanke ' maka yatni-rha'ani ha rhu'ru ralma ida nma nler temna . Riy de mak kwatiawu leta maka rehgorgor die , mere edonna napola-naraini me nahmena namteman la roma nayanni la mahnek memna . Nhi'inde nhol tio ' a hu'ula-liena mak kden la tniamin matgeni .
When he saw Jesus , he cried out and fell down before him , and with a loud voice said , What do I have to do with you , Jesus , you Son of the Most High God ? I beg you , do n't torment me ! ||| La'pa namkek nana Yesus dewade nhaunu-nhaunu na'nama nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama nhaun pa niwra , Yesus ee ! O ' de Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni A'nani O ' a ! Hota Omhi ' nana a ' g emkameni ee ! Awuakwak pa yana Mukmua a ' u .
For Jesus was commanding the unclean spirit to come out of the man . For the unclean spirit had often seized the man . He was kept under guard and bound with chains and fetters . Breaking the bonds apart , he was driven by the demon into the desert . ||| Riy de Nakot emkade yoma Yesus Nhopan pa nhiw yatni-rha'ani de nlergot la e ' a . Yoma nhi'inde nhiw yatni-rha'ani de nma nhu'ru ralma pede riy e rwutu-rkohog e limni-lakni , de rnairia wutwutu mnotna ne yatiaka npitu-nkor la ho'mana , na'ed lia inonni pa nwuhi eti-lahwa re la ' a limni-lakni , dewade nhiwa-nhion yatni-rha'ani de nodia la wo'orletna-kawurloini .
Jesus asked him , What is your name ? He said , Legion , for many demons had entered into him . ||| Noma Yesus natiana eda riy de Niwra , O nanmu he ' a ? Noma riy de nwalolla niwra , A na'nu Legion . Nanni de nnia'eratni makodi keki-rautu woka liawanni yoma nhiwa-nhion yatni-rha'ani liawanni rler olek la la ' a e ihranu ralamni .
They begged him that he would not command them to go into the abyss . ||| Noma nhiwa-nhion yatni-rha'ani re rwakwak rer lia Yesus totpena Yesus yana Nho'or targ ir la ' a hu'ula-liena matmiati-molmuolu mak kodia niukum lalawna pa nodi liarni .
Now there was there a herd of many pigs feeding on the mountain , and they begged him that he would allow them to enter into those . Then he allowed them . ||| La ' hande de e rehgorgorga gen miaka wawi wok lawna rwayowar pa rahak pa ra'ana-remun la wo'ora hananni . Noma nhiwa-nhion yatni-rha'ani re rwak lilili-mamuau lia Yesus totpena rhopan nekpa irler la wawi re inonni ralamni . Noma Yesus Nwayowa .
The demons came out of the man and entered into the pigs , and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned . ||| Dewade rlergot la riy de inonni , pa rla ' rhu'ru ralma wawi re , na'nama honona re rawlar pia rla rlererun la weran teti pa ema rwuwul wenwenna la ' danau de ralamni .
When those who fed them saw what had happened , they fled and told it in the city and in the country . ||| Mak khuri-kwa'ana wawi re rlina-rmat memna hya ' maka wawi re rhi ' oleka re wa . Nhor nioka rawlar pia rla rod kiota la ' a ir letni me gen miaka rehgorgorga .
People went out to see what had happened . They came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone out , sitting at Jesus ' feet , clothed and in his right mind , and they were afraid . ||| Noma riy rlergot pa rma rpoi-rkeka ramkeka hya ' maka ha rakota re . Riy rawok la Yesus onni pa ramkek memna riy maka nhiwa-nhion yatni-rha'ani ha rlergot la de , e nawiatur targa la Yesus lakni onni pa natlin rer lia . Ramkek de riy de nnairi oleka pola-raini me wniaror samomuou ed olek la ihranu ralamni . Noma riy honona re ramta'at wenna .
Those who saw it told them how he who had been possessed by demons was healed . ||| Ne riy mak kden hande pa ramkek oleka Yesus Nhokar doinia nhiwa-nhion yatni-rha'ani re , de rwahaur nohor hadel la ' a riy mak kmaiya re , riwra Yesus Nhi ' emkameni pede riy de nler la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
All the people of the surrounding country of the Gadarenes asked him to depart from them , for they were very much afraid . Then he entered into the boat and returned . ||| Nhor na'nama riy honona mak kden la Gerasa uhunu-ewatni rwak lilili-mamuau pua Yesus yan memmemna Nalo'on la ' gen die ne plet pa Nwaran nek wa , yoma riy rahu ramta'at wenna . La ' hade pede Yesus Nha'at la puou pa Nla'awa .
But the man from whom the demons had gone out begged him that he might go with him , but Jesus sent him away , saying , ||| Mere edon Nla ' ma'ta de riy maka kalwied olekwa de nwak la Yesus totpena nlernohor rer wialia Yesus . Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra ,
Return to your house , and declare what great things God has done for you . He went his way , proclaiming throughout the whole city what great things Jesus had done for him . ||| Yana , mere samomuounu de muwal lia genmu-tienmu , me mukot nohora la ' a hare honona mak samomuou memna maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a-nyapi la o ' a . Dewade riy de nla'awa la'pa nakot nohora hare honona la letni uhunu-ewatni-lahwani honona la ' a hya ' a maka Yesus Nhi ' a la e ' a .
When Jesus returned , the multitude welcomed him , for they were all waiting for him . ||| Yesus Nwatiawu danau walli pa Nmai owa'ana , noma riy harahu mak kden hande rhimlolioi-rlakdardara yoma rwei niek E ' a .
Behold , a man named Jairus came . He was a ruler of the synagogue . He fell down at Jesus ' feet and begged him to come into his house , ||| Noma edon nalo'on wali ne Yairus makhi ' o'tani la ' a gen maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli de nmai pia nwaltior la Yesus nayanni na'nama nwak lilili-mamuau lia Yesus , totpena Yesus Nodi liarni la ' e romni nayanni .
for he had an only born daughter , about twelve years of age , and she was dying . But as he went , the multitudes pressed against him . ||| Yoma a'nani pat hararara memeh ' a maka na'nama tuwnu anni termida wehrani woru , trema-trema hota nmat wia . Ne la'pa Yesus Enalala ' rer mia'ta pa edonna nte ' ma'ta la Yairus romni nayanni , ne rira liawanni rpakdie'da lola etnu-liolli pa rma rherit nana Yesus walli-walli .
A woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years , who had spent all her living on physicians and could not be healed by any , ||| La ' riy rahu re , de patke ' mak khur riara la ' a anni termida wehrani woru , e nor wali . Nnienni-nhienni de narieiniande nahor dioin momuoga re'eni-tniarnu pa na npair la makakrui-kagapnu dokter mere edonna nkalwied eti .
came behind him and touched the fringe of his cloak . Immediately the flow of her blood stopped . ||| Noma pat de nlernohora Yesus pa nwakrian pa ndella Yesus to'orni na'nama nteman la Yesus raini plalahwani tawnu . La'pa mtatande nekpa rarni mak kawdiadia ' i de nkeran wa pa nkalwied wa .
Jesus said , Who touched me ? When all denied it , Peter and those with him said , Master , the multitudes press and jostle you , and you say , ‘ Who touched me ? ' ||| Noma Yesus Natiana Niwra , He ' ed maka kteman la A rainu tawnu ? Mere mak kden hande honona rwair wawayanni pa riwra , Ami edonna . Noma Petrus niwra , Tuna , rirahu e rlernohora rer lia ' O to'ormu pa rpakdie'da .
But Jesus said , Someone did touch me , for I perceived that power has gone out of me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mere hota riy doma rtot A ' pua rteman la A rainu tawnu . A ' g e gat niohora de yoma emeknekama A ru'ru-la'yu e nlergot la A ino'nu ralamni .
When the woman saw that she was not hidden , she came trembling , and falling down before him declared to him in the presence of all the people the reason why she had touched him , and how she was healed immediately . ||| Noma pat de namta'at pa ndiwdiwra yoma ratg oleka e hihi'ini-yapyapni , pede nleretniekla nmai pia nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Yesus nayanni na'nama nwahaur nohora la ' a rirahu re gaini ralamni la ' a maka ha nhi ' a re pede nnienni nleretniekla nkalwied wa .
He said to her , Daughter , cheer up . Your faith has made you well . Go in peace . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , O pesiaymu e narur mai A ' u ina pa mkialwied wa ! Mlia'awa pa mmuori-mdiar lia kalwiedni-paitiotni .
While he still spoke , one from the ruler of the synagogue 's house came , saying to him , Your daughter is dead . Do n't trouble the Teacher . ||| La'pa Yesus e Naltiertier mia'ta de dewade riy ida nwatiawu Yairus romni pa nmai nakot la Yairus de niwra , Tuna , a'namu nmati olekwa pa yana mpuaka Tungkur die pa Nla ' a o rommu nayanni .
But Jesus hearing it , answered him , Do n't be afraid . Only believe , and she will be healed . ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin nana noma Nakot la Yairus Niwra , Yan mumta'ata . Mpuesiay niek wa . Ne hota a'namu de nler la kalwiedni .
When he came to the house , he did n't allow anyone to enter in , except Peter , John , James , the father of the child , and her mother . ||| La'pa rte'ela Yairus romni nayanni noma Yesus Nlaran pa riy id mana yana nler la rialma , eneknek to'ama Petrus , Yohansi , Yakowsi ne keke'en mak kmati olek de inni nor amni nanpa rler la rialma .
All were weeping and mourning her , but he said , Do n't weep . She is n't dead , but sleeping . ||| La ' ler de riy honona mak kden la hande ertepartar olek la knio ' a-kniakru la patke ' de matmiatni . Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Yana mkiakru . Yoma hararar de edonna nmati , hade e nanin to ' a !
They were ridiculing him , knowing that she was dead . ||| Riy honona riarin taru la yamalli yoma ratg oleka de hararar de nmati olekwa .
But he put them all outside , and taking her by the hand , he called , saying , Child , arise ! ||| Mere Yesus Ntorreria hararar de limni na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Ina , mumata !
Her spirit returned , and she rose up immediately . He commanded that something be given to her to eat . ||| Hararar de aranni la ' owa'an la temni , pa mtatande nekpa namat doin la wa . Na'nama Yesus Nhopan pa ralla na'ana .
Her parents were amazed , but he commanded them to tell no one what had been done . ||| Inni-amni rwer rer wiawni la ' a keke'en de ! Mere Yesus Nlaran pa yana rakota hadella hehe ' a .
He called the twelve together and gave them power and authority over all demons , and to cure diseases . ||| Yesus Npol wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riy termida wehrani woru , na'nama Nala plolli-mneheni me rurni-laini la ir honona re , totpena ra rhokra-rlaiya hegana-kawnu yatni-rha'ani me ra rakalwieda mak kanieni-kahniena .
He sent them out to preach God 's Kingdom and to heal the sick . ||| Nhor nia'nama Nhopan pa rla rhi ' kalwieda riy mak kanieni-kahniena , ne rla ' pa rakot nohora emkameni la hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emekwalima Ray .
He said to them , Take nothing for your journey-no staffs , nor wallet , nor bread , nor money . Do n't have two tunics each . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hyal miy re , yan miodia hadomdoma la ' yala'ami de . De yana miodia lie'ena onde arkai . Yana miodia ya'ana-yemnu , onde kupna , onde hewewta-naniairi ida-woru pa mhiernu miy rayanmi la ' talan ralma .
Into whatever house you enter , stay there , and depart from there . ||| Hota la roma-lewu maka riy rreiniana-ra'nan miy , de mdien nek la ir romni la'pa kniarmi la ' let de la nhorwua nanpena mpiaran la ' rom de .
As many as do n't receive you , when you depart from that city , shake off even the dust from your feet for a testimony against them . ||| Ne la'pa la let id de riy edonna rreiniana-ra'nan miy , de mtio'or doin let de , mkiakan doinia awu mak kden la lakmi lia'armi totpa mtiutga de Uplerlawna Nwayotlia ira .
They departed and went throughout the villages , preaching the Good News and healing everywhere . ||| Yesus Nakot pa nhorwua noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwaran wa pa rla'awa la ' leta-ruhuna re pa rakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota me rhi ' kalwieda mak kamehra-kamau mak kden la meni-meni , la ' a nnienni-nhienni re .
Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him , and he was very perplexed , because it was said by some that John had risen from the dead , ||| La'awa lerni pa Herodes maka kodi plolli la Galilea natlin nana Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni re honona . Dewade Herodes nwarora la ' a-mai nohora Yesus di he ' a ? Yoma natlin de riy doma rakot nohora Yesus riwra , Yohansi makharani die e nmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni eda de .
and by some that Elijah had appeared , and by others that one of the old prophets had risen again . ||| Dom de mana riwra , Elia nayamkek owa'ana eda de , me dom de owa'an riwra , Makwohorulu-ktatrulu la ' a ululu genni mak kmati olekwa re e rmori owa'ana eda de .
Herod said , I beheaded John , but who is this about whom I hear such things ? He sought to see him . ||| Noma Herodes niwra , Mere a ' g ed mak khopan pa riy rdawr eti oleka Yohanis de tiernu ne he ' targho ' riy de maka ha rakot nohora Nhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona dino ? Noma Herodes nwahak talan pa namkeka Yesus .
The apostles , when they had returned , told him what things they had done . He took them and withdrew apart to a desert region of a city called Bethsaida . ||| La'awa lerni pa maka Yesus Nhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re rawal pia rakot nohora hya ' a maka ha rhi ' nana re honona la Yesus . Noma Yesus Nhopan pa ir honona rora E ' pa rla ' rewre'wa la leta Betsaida onni , totpa rmeh ' a rden to'ola la ' a gen hgalgali .
But the multitudes , perceiving it , followed him . He welcomed them , spoke to them of God 's Kingdom , and he cured those who needed healing . ||| Mere la ' pa riy harahu re rat niohora , noma rmai pia rlernohor reria Yesus , noma Enreiniana re . Dewade Nakot la re la ' a hota emkameni pa Uplerlawna Nodi plolli de emeknekama Ray . Ne E ' wal pia Nhi ' mak kamehra-kamau re pa rler la kalwiedni .
The day began to wear away , and the twelve came and said to him , Send the multitude away , that they may go into the surrounding villages and farms and lodge and get food , for we are here in a deserted place . ||| La'pa lera niwa ntuinia , noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re termida wehrani woru rmai pia rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , gen di olieta la leta ! Mhuopan nekpa riy harahu ri rla'awa totpena rwahak ya'ana-yemannu me yanin genni la ' a leta-ruhuna la ' a gen miaka itdella di walli-walli dom to ' a .
But he said to them , You give them something to eat . They said , We have no more than five loaves and two fish , unless we should go and buy food for all these people . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la , Pena mialla ra'ana . Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , a wareher mamni ri eneknek to'ama roti deulu wolima , me i'na wor tiututu . Yanpa Omiwra amla mawelia yamanan pa riy mutlialawna ri ra'ana ?
For they were about five thousand men . He said to his disciples , Make them sit down in groups of about fifty each . ||| La'pa edon nhal de rrekan nana muanke ' mamaini , de riy riwnu wolima . Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Mhiopan pa honona re ramtatan momuoga ne rnawera la wokni-wokni . La'pa edon nhal de , rima-rima wokni , de riy terampwolima .
They did so , and made them all sit down . ||| Noka maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhi ' a hya ' a maka Yesus Nakota la ira . La'pa rirahu re ramtatna momuoga ,
He took the five loaves and the two fish , and looking up to the sky , he blessed them , broke them , and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitude . ||| noma Yesus Na'ala rot dieulu re wolima , me i'na rora , na'nama Nwatniar la heyanan pa Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna . Na'nama Nhawi-nhawia roti re , me Nwikria i'na re noma Nala la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rhakre'era la ' a riy mutlialawna re honona .
They ate and were all filled . They gathered up twelve baskets of broken pieces that were left over . ||| Honona re ra'an pa rpehera . Ra'an pa rwair wa , noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rawok nana mak ra'an atre ' a , de kriou penpuenu termida wehrani woru .
As he was praying alone , the disciples were near him , and he asked them , Who do the multitudes say that I am ? ||| La'pa lera ida ne Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmemeh ' a taru , ne Yesus e Nsumbain reri . Nhorwua noma Yesus Natiana re Niwra , Nhi'inde riy e riwra A ' die he ' o ?
They answered , ‘ John the Baptizer , ' but others say , ‘ Elijah , ' and others , that one of the old prophets has risen again . ||| Noma mutwualli re rwet la riwra , Tuna , riy dom de riwra Yohansi makharani O ' a , dom de riwra makwohorulu-ktatrulu Elia , mak kmori owa'ana , me dom to ' owa'an riwra O ' de makwohorulu-ktatrulu dom to ' a la ululu geni pa kmori owa'ana .
He said to them , But who do you say that I am ? Peter answered , The Christ of God . ||| Noka Yesus Natian owa'ana , Mere A'utian tek miy . La ' miy wniarormi de , A ' di de he ' A ' u ? Noma Petrus nwet la , Matro'mu , O ' di de Ray mak kodia mormiori-lewlewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru Mesias O inhatti !
But he warned them and commanded them to tell this to no one , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Maka Petrus nakota de naplol memna mere yan memmemna mikot nohor ma'ta hadella riy doma .
saying , The Son of Man must suffer many things , and be rejected by the elders , chief priests , and scribes , and be killed , and the third day be raised up . ||| Mere mhioratreria ! Uplerlawna ralma-riorni olek pa Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota tiutulu-lielewua kropna-krieutu , yamuki-yama'ala , me hota ina-ama Yahudi rora imam-imam re o'tani-matni , me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rwayotli A ' u . Ne Uplerlawna Nala pa hota rwen A ' u mere la'pa nodia la lera wotellu de Uplerlawna Namori owa'an A lia matmiati ralamni .
He said to all , If anyone desires to come after me , let him deny himself , take up his cross , and follow me . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nakot la riy honona mak kden la hande Niwra , Riy meni mak kiwra klernohor A ' u , de nhoratdoin momuoga hya ' ed maka e ralamni nod rer lia , ne lera-ler nekpa nre ' wut lia A ' pua nler la yamuki-yama'ala onde matmiati pa emolmolan nekama nhoi wawayanni la auwlakra pa nlernohor A ' u .
For whoever desires to save his life will lose it , but whoever will lose his life for my sake will save it . ||| Yoma la'pa hameni maka edonna nhorat doinia mormiorni noh di wawannu de hota e ' edon nler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Mere la'pa riy maka khoratdoinia mormiorni la noh di wawannu pa nlernohor reri A ' u hota nlernana mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
For what does it profit a man if he gains the whole world , and loses or forfeits his own self ? ||| La'pa riy mak klernana nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu honona mere hota edonna nlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni , de hota re'eni-tniarnu re edon nodi unut hadom la ' riy de .
For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words , of him will the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes in his glory , and the glory of the Father , and of the holy angels . ||| La'pa he ' maka kmola-kma ' pa kreinian A ' u me kwayow nana A li'ru-A tu'nu la ' lera-mela ri , de hota Rimormiori A'na A ' muana , muola-mua ' wal pia rieinian riy della , la ' ler maka hota Amuai owa'an de godia A plol wamueh ' u me la ' walia A A'mu plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni pa Agor wutga Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikat mak khita-krepra me edonna kheik la do ' a-hala ralamni Ammai die .
But I tell you the truth , There are some of those who stand here who will in no way taste of death until they see God 's Kingdom . ||| Mhioratreria ! Hota la ' a miy hononmi la handi de riy dom de mak edonna rmati mia'ta mere hota ramkek ulu Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka mak ktorna-krautu .
About eight days after these sayings , he took with him Peter , John , and James , and went up onto the mountain to pray . ||| La'pa Yesus Nwatutu-nwaye ' nana hare honona pa nhorwua , noma lera wo'itu-wo'awa rlardoinla na'nama Yesus Nodia Petrus , Yohansi me Yakowsi pa rha'at la wo'ora id hananni totpa la'pa rsumbaini .
As he was praying , the appearance of his face was altered , and his clothing became white and dazzling . ||| La'pa Yesus e Nsumbain reri dewade plinu-plinnianama Yesus gaini to ' a me naniayarni hitita-reprepra .
Behold , two men were talking with him , who were Moses and Elijah , who appeared in glory and spoke of his departure , which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem . ||| Na'nama riy worga rayamkek la ' hitita-reprepra mak kwatiawu Ilyamou-Watyatoha , de Musa nor Elia pa ror rewre'wa Yesus rtepartarlia wniahaur nohora la ' a Yesus matmiatni maka nwakrian wia , la ' a leta Yerusalem . Hota Yesus Nler la matmiat die totpa Uplerlawna wniarorni-wnialaini la ' ululu de ntutu-nte'ewa .
Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep , but when they were fully awake , they saw his glory , and the two men who stood with him . ||| La ' ler de , Petrus nora mutwualli re rleretniekla ranina wa , mere plinu-plinnianama ramat doin la wa pa ramkek de Yesus inonni nhita-nrepra ne Musa nora Elia rtutrier niohora .
As they were parting from him , Peter said to Jesus , Master , it is good for us to be here . Let 's make three tents , one for you , one for Moses , and one for Elijah , not knowing what he said . ||| Ne la'pa Musa nora Elia riwra rhoitio'or la Yesus pa rla'awa , noma Petrus nakot la Yesus Niwra , Tuna , itden la handi de samoga , pa hota Tuna Nwayowa de amariria hoiwiali wotel lia handi , totpena id la Tuna , id la Musa me id wal lia Elia . La'pa Petrus Naltier emkade edonna nwarora pleinia ne nanni nekpa naltier wia .
While he said these things , a cloud came and overshadowed them , and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud . ||| La'pa Petrus naltiertier rieri , dewade kakam woka de nmai pia npupun nana ira pa ramta'at wenna .
A voice came out of the cloud , saying , This is my beloved Son . Listen to him ! ||| Noma ratlin nana lira id nwatiawua kakam de ralamni pa niwra , Hadi de A A'nu maka Awualir nian inhatti , pa mitlin la ' E lirni .
When the voice came , Jesus was found alone . They were silent , and told no one in those days any of the things which they had seen . ||| La'pa lir de nhorwua dewade ramkek de Yesus Nmeh ' a Nden la hande . La ' ler de de , riy maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a wotelu re edonna rakot nohora la riy ida hya ' maka ir ramkek nana la'pa la ntutu meman la ler maka Yesus Nmori owa'ana .
On the next day , when they had come down from the mountain , a great multitude met him . ||| La'pa repar wa dewade Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a wotelu re rerun la wo'or de pa rmai wia , noma rirahu rma rahaka Yesus .
Behold , a man from the crowd called out , saying , Teacher , I beg you to look at my son , for he is my only born child . ||| La ' a riy woklawan de ralamni de muanke ' ida nhaun pa niwra , Tungkurga Mtiulan pa Mkil nian la a'nu ! A a'nu ha nmemeh ' a to ' a , Tungkurga !
Behold , a spirit takes him , he suddenly cries out , and it convulses him so that he foams , and it hardly departs from him , bruising him severely . ||| La'pa hegana-kawnu rhu'ru ralma , dewade nhaunu klellelu , ne inonni toktokla wewuehera me aparni nou-natna . Hegana-kawnu de nahmena nollia la , ne niwra nweyata-nwaniawua !
I begged your disciples to cast it out , and they could n't . ||| Awuak olek wal lia maka Ompuatutu-mpuaye ' a re totpa rhokar doinia hegana-kawun della mere taken niana irhokar doinia la .
Jesus answered , Faithless and perverse generation , how long shall I be with you and bear with you ? Bring your son here . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hoi ! Miy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala me mak kakleha pesiay . Hota lera wo'ir owa'an pa Agor miy tialla me Agod niohor miy , nanpena mimpiesiay A ' u ? ! Muodia a'namu de pa mmuai !
While he was still coming , the demon threw him down and convulsed him violently . But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit , healed the boy , and gave him back to his father . ||| La'pa keke'en de nala ' pa nma nwakriania Yesus , de hegana-kawnu de mana nkarwa'ga keke'eni de la tani wawannu pa limni-lakni totok la wewuehera . Mere Yesus Nakot la , Hoi ! Hegana-kawnu ne mliergota la ' a keke'en de ralamni ! Mtatande nekpa hegana-kawnu nlergot la wa pa keke'enku ' de nkalwied wa . Noma Yesus Nal owa'an keke'en della la amni .
They were all astonished at the majesty of God . But while all were marveling at all the things which Jesus did , he said to his disciples , ||| Riy honona rawera-rawer wawni la Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni maka ha ramkek nana la Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni de . La ler de rimormiori honona la hande e rwer rer mia'ta wawnia la ' a hare honona maka Yesus Nhi ' nana-nyap niana re , mere Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra ,
Let these words sink into your ears , for the Son of Man will be delivered up into the hands of men . ||| Mtia'wa kalwiedweda tlinmi me yana mhioratdoinia A li'ru-tu'nu ri . Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota ral A lia rimormiori limni ralamni .
But they did n't understand this saying . It was concealed from them , that they should not perceive it , and they were afraid to ask him about this saying . ||| Mere maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re edonna rna'erit nana Yesus ha Nakotkota re . E lirni de , e rkukum tar mua'ta nnia'eratni totpena yana rat niohora Yesus lirni de lie'erni . Ne ir nek de ramta'at wali pia edonna ratian la ' a-maiya Yesus ralma-riorni .
An argument arose among them about which of them was the greatest . ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rahuri-rawo'or nohor lir mak kiwra hota ir he ' ed maka inponni nrehi ?
Jesus , perceiving the reasoning of their hearts , took a little child , and set him by his side , ||| Yesus Natg oleka honona re ralma-riorni , la ' hade pede Ntorreri keke'enku ' ida limni na'nama Nala pa ntutrier lia E onni .
and said to them , Whoever receives this little child in my name receives me . Whoever receives me receives him who sent me . For whoever is least among you all , this one will be great . ||| Noma Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Hyal miy re , hota he ' mak kreiniana-ka'nana keke'enku ' a emeka hadi onnila A rerie'yu de emekwalima nreinian olek A wua . Ne la hameni mak kreiniana A ' u , de emekwalima nreinian oleka Uplerlawna mak khopn A ' u . Yoma riy maka khima-kre ' a riy mak kakleh weli de ir er maka inpona la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
John answered , Master , we saw someone casting out demons in your name , and we forbade him , because he does n't follow with us . ||| Yohansi Niwra , Matroma , ami e mamkeka riy nhokra hegana-kawnu , de e nwet la Matro'mu nanni pede ami e mlarna de yoma it mutwualli atia ' a hade .
Jesus said to him , Do n't forbid him , for he who is not against us is for us . ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Yana mliarna de , yoma hota hameni mak edonna khoklira-kpah ' a wawa la riy id de nnia'eratni de ir er maka ktulan la riy de .
It came to pass , when the days were near that he should be taken up , he intently set his face to go to Jerusalem ||| La'pa nhi'pa nte'ela lerni pa Yesus Narian pa Nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha dewade orgahani Netlia lirni de emkameni ho'mana Nla ' a Yerusalem .
and sent messengers before his face . They went and entered into a village of the Samaritans , so as to prepare for him . ||| Noma la'pa Nalala ' rer mia'ta Nhopan pa riy rala ' ulg E ' a . Riy maka Ha Nhopan pa kala ' ulu re totpena rla rwahi ' a-rwayod lia Yesus maimiaini la ' a let id mak kden la Samaria .
They did n't receive him , because he was traveling with his face set toward Jerusalem . ||| Mere riy mak kden la let de rahmena-rapraiya Yesus maimiaini la ' hande yoma ratga de , Yesus e Nharan reria Yerusalem .
When his disciples , James and John , saw this , they said , Lord , do you want us to command fire to come down from the sky and destroy them , just as Elijah did ? ||| Mere la'pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , de Yakowsi nor Yohansi namkek nan hade noma rakot la riwra , Matroma , Ompuayow de ampaka ai pa nwatiawua lyanti pa nernu totpena nram doinia let di nora rimormiornio ?
But he turned and rebuked them , You do n't know of what kind of spirit you are . ||| Noma Yesus Nkillia re na'nama Nawenan la re .
For the Son of Man did n't come to destroy men 's lives , but to save them . They went to another village . ||| Nhor nioma rla rlol to ' a leta dom to ' a .
As they went on the way , a certain man said to him , I want to follow you wherever you go , Lord . ||| La'pa Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rala ' pa rodi liarni , noma riy doma nakot la Yesus niwra , Tuna , a ' g e giwra liernohor rer nek O ' Tuna pa tlol meni-meni .
Jesus said to him , The foxes have holes and the birds of the sky have nests , but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hyalia , Ohpora-ahdiawra hu'ulli-lienni erla me onu-ma'nu nekane puonni erla , mere Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota A ' g edon liernan gen pia A'udera A o'tu . Ne hota omliernohor A ' die hota o e mukleha wali geni .
He said to another , Follow me ! But he said , Lord , allow me first to go and bury my father . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot wal lia riy id to ' a Niwra , Mliernohora A ' u . Mere riy de niwra , Tuna , Muolin doin a ' pua la'pa arie'ela tiamnia a'mu nampena aliernohor rer O ' a .
But Jesus said to him , Leave the dead to bury their own dead , but you go and announce God 's Kingdom . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Muolin doinia riy mak edon kpesiay A ' u pede emeknekama rmati olekwa pa orgahani rtamnia mak kmati . Mere o ' a de mlia ' pa mukot nohora la riy honona miwra Uplerlawna emeknekama Ray miaka kodi plolli .
Another also said , I want to follow you , Lord , but first allow me to say good-bye to those who are at my house . ||| La ' riy id mana nwak pa nakot la Yesus niwra , Tuna , a ralmu naplele'er pa aliernohor Tuna mere Ompuayowa agora pleini a i'nu-a'mu wair nanpena amuai !
But Jesus said to him , No one , having put his hand to the plow and looking back , is fit for God 's Kingdom . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la riy de Niwra , La'pa riy ida ntepartarlia wnial tani , ne nkillia to'orni , de hota e kniarni de edon naplola . Ne hota emkade walia la riy mak kiwra kla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka Enodi plolli la emeka Ray . La'pa riy de nwaror to ' a neka inni-narni onde re'eni-tniarnu de hota kniarni la Uplerlawna edon naplola .
Now after these things , the Lord also appointed seventy others , and sent them two by two ahead of him into every city and place where he was about to come . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Itmatromlawanni Nwalir niana , maklernohor E ' a riy terampwo'itu , na'nama Nhopan doinia pa rala ' ulga E ' pa rla ' a geni-tien honona maka Yesus hota Niwra Nla ' a . Rla ' a de rima-rima nor talanwalli id pa rala ' wutu .
Then he said to them , The harvest is indeed plentiful , but the laborers are few . Pray therefore to the Lord of the harvest , that he may send out laborers into his harvest . ||| Nakot la re Nnairia yawalliohora id pa Niwra , Emolmolan nekama wetra ' harahu maka nkern olek la nhyi ' ralma , mere mak kreiki-kwo'ora , edonna rtu'tu , emkade walia mak edon katlin ma'ta Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni de harahu wali mere mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni riy doma rmeh ' a . La ' hade pede emolmolan nekama rwak la ora nhyi ' de totpena nhopna mak kreiki-kwo'ora pa rreiki-rwo'ora , mpiak wal lia Uplerlawna totpena Ntutga riy pa rre'ela rakot nohora Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni la rimormiori mak edon katlin ma'ta .
Go your ways . Behold , I send you out as lambs among wolves . ||| Dodo'ondi mirian wa ! Mere mhioratreria ! A ' g e ghopan pa mlia'awa A arwa'lu geni pede hota miy die emeknekama pipi-duma mak kakleh ruri-lai pia mlier tar lia ohpora-ahdiawra letgarni mak kiwra klihir matmata-khaw riarara .
Carry no purse , nor wallet , nor sandals . Greet no one on the way . ||| Mlia ' de yan mia miodia kupna genni , onde arkai onde lakmi wniowni pa ma mhierun doin maka ha mniairia de , ne yana mrien mahneka la talan letgar yoma miora riy mpiahauru .
Into whatever house you enter , first say , ‘ Peace be to this house . ' ||| La'pa mimlier la roma id ralamni , de mhiar ulga lirmi pa miwra , Kalwieda la miy hononmi !
If a son of peace is there , your peace will rest on him , but if not , it will return to you . ||| La'pa mliernana riy maka kreinian miy lia nhiolia samomuou , de hota plol toto ' a pa riy de nlernana kalwieda-paitiota . Mere la'pa edonan de Uplerlawna edon Nal kalwiedni la ' riy de .
Remain in that same house , eating and drinking the things they give , for the laborer is worthy of his wages . Do n't go from house to house . ||| La'pa riy rreinian miy , de mdien nek la la rom de wa . Mi'ina-miemnia hya ' maka ha nhoi-ntania tiy miy , yoma riy meni mak ktulla-kari de hota nlernan siewni-kaini la ' a liwatnu-odawni . Yana mpiatitin la ' a-mai genmi-tienmi .
Into whatever city you enter and they receive you , eat the things that are set before you . ||| La'pa mimlier la leta ida , ne let de mniotni rreiniana-ra'nan miy , mi'ina-miemun de yana mmiakriarnia .
Heal the sick who are there and tell them , ‘ God 's Kingdom has come near to you . ' ||| Mhi ' kalwieda riy mak kamehra-kamau la ' a let de ne mikot la let de mniotni miwra , Ntutu-nte ' olek pa hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeknekama Ray .
But into whatever city you enter and they do n't receive you , go out into its streets and say , ||| Mere la'pa miy mmiai wia la ' leta ida , ne let de mniotni edonna rreiniana-ra'nan miy , demade mlia'awa la talla ralamni , ne mikot la miwra ,
‘ Even the dust from your city that clings to us , we wipe off against you . Nevertheless know this , that God 's Kingdom has come near to you . ' ||| Hoi ! La'pa miy kodmi-awmi re nek de e ratniapal la ' a lak mamni , amkakan doinia totpena nwagahniorat miy la ' a Uplerlawna Nwayotli miy , yoma mikleha pesiay . Mere mhioratreria ! Ntutu-nte ' olek pa hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeknekama Ray .
I tell you , it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that city . ||| Mhioratreria ! La ' a lera-mela nte'ela noha niatni , leta-ruhuna maka edon kreinian miy er maka klernana Uplerlawna niukamnu mak kareh dioin miemna niukamnu maka riy yatyata-halala mak kden la leta Sodom hota rlernana .
Woe to you , Chorazin ! Woe to you , Bethsaida ! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you , they would have repented long ago , sitting in sackcloth and ashes . ||| Hoi ! Mak kden Korasim nora Betsaid miy ree ! Hota mlier la yatlorni-yatra'ani . Yoma miy edonna mpiadan nohora hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka ha mimkek oleka re . Mak kden la Tirus me Sidon edon ramkek nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak emkare la ' ler ululu , mere la'pa Aghi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak emkare la mak kden la leta Tirus nora Sidon la ' ler ululu de ramkek nana neknanama plol toto ' pa rnair oleka naniairi yaluli-yahona pa ra rtutga ralamni mawla la do'oni-halli me rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioini oleka do'oni-halli re .
But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for you . ||| Mere la ' a miy die hota la'pa ntutu-nte'ela la ' a lera noha niatni , de hota Uplerlawna niukamnu la ' miy wawanmi nareh dioin la mak kden la leta Tirus nora Sidon re .
You , Capernaum , who are exalted to heaven , will be brought down to Hades . ||| Ne hota mak kden la Kapernaum miy , la ' wniarormi de hota rran tutul miy nanmi lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha ? Hade edon emkade . Hota reriehenu rrinnia miy lia ai mormiori ralamni naraka .
Whoever listens to you listens to me , and whoever rejects you rejects me . Whoever rejects me rejects him who sent me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , La'pa he ' mak katlin tiy miy , de hota riy de natlin mai A ' u . Ne la riy maka kwayotil miy , de hare e rwayotlia A ' u . Ne la ' a riy maka kwayotlia A ' u , de hare er maka kwayotlia Uplerlawna maka khopan pa Amuai .
The seventy returned with joy , saying , Lord , even the demons are subject to us in your name ! ||| Noma riy teram mandiditu terampwo'itu re rla ' rhi ' kniarni nhor diewade rawali pia rmai die , rahepuepur reri pa riwra , Matrom ee ! Amla ' de nhiw yatni-rha'ani mana ema rdopal dodioinia yoma ampet la Orgahi-Orha ' a O nanmu !
He said to them , I saw Satan having fallen like lightning from heaven . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Yowa ne , A'umkek nana hegana amlawanni ema rwaliernia la ' a lyanti , de emeknekama tlena .
Behold , I give you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions , and over all the power of the enemy . Nothing will in any way hurt you . ||| Ne totpena miatga , de Agal oleka ruri-lai tiy miy wia totpena ma mpiahapra niy nora hodai , me la ' walia miy arwalmi de hegana amlawanni mana , mtiewra rurni-laini . Hota hadoma ta'en niana nhi ' wano ' a-warar miy .
Nevertheless , do n't rejoice in this , that the spirits are subject to you , but rejoice that your names are written in heaven . ||| La'pa emkade ho'mana yana mihepur nohora yatni-rha'ani e rlola miy nayanmi . La ' samomuounu de mihepru , yoma miy nanmi e rahniorat la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
In that same hour , Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit , and said , I thank you , O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding , and revealed them to little children . Yes , Father , for so it was well-pleasing in your sight . ||| La ' ler de meman pa Yesus Nahepuepru yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak kodi plolli la E ' a , pa Nhar lirni la Uplerlawna . Niwra , Ama , Orgahi-Orha ' a mak ktorna-krautia nohmarna nora lyanti tulu ! A ' u'uli-uwedi O ' a yoma wniarormu-wnialaimu hihi'imu-yapyapmu de O e Muwunmua la ' a riy maka kakriahlu la iskola me rwarora ir er mak katu , mere Omukota la riy maka nhiolli-lietni emeka keke'enku ' a pa rlol yawa . Yoma plol toto ' a pa hade ed mak kla ' nana A'mu O ralma-riormu .
Turning to the disciples , he said , All things have been delivered to me by my Father . No one knows who the Son is , except the Father , and who the Father is , except the Son , and he to whomever the Son desires to reveal him . ||| Nsumbain pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot la mak kden hande Niwra , A A'mu Nal oleka plolli-mneheni kirkira-ralma-rior samomuounu mai A ' wua . Riy id mana edon nat niohora A ' u eneknek to'ama A A'mu . Me riy id mana edonna nat niohora A A'mu eneknek to'ama E A'nani A ' u , ne riy mak Agiwra ukot wahyaria A A'mu la ira .
Turning to the disciples , he said privately , Blessed are the eyes which see the things that you see , ||| Noma Yesus Nkillia maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmemeh ' a pa Nakot la Niwra , Miy e mliernana oleka unut lawna , yoma miy e mimkek oleka A hihi ' u-yapya'pu re .
for I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see the things which you see , and did n't see them , and to hear the things which you hear , and did n't hear them . ||| Mpiahniorta , A'ukot emkade yoma makwohorulu-ktatrulu harahu me la ' walia ray-ray la ' ler ululu rwak pa ramkek walia hihi ' a-yapyap miaka Aghi ' nana , me rwak pa ratlin walia la ' a hya ' ed maka Awuatut niohor di , mere A maimia'yu lerni edon ntutu-nte ' ma'ta pede ta'en niana ramkeka onde ratlina .
Behold , a certain lawyer stood up and tested him , saying , Teacher , what shall I do to inherit eternal life ? ||| La ' lera ida noma makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama deullu-tatarni ida nta'aga Yesus . Ntutrieri pa natiana Yesus niwra , Tungkurga , aghi ' a hya ' a totpena aliernana mormiori-dardiar plalahwa pa nodi liarni ?
He said to him , What is written in the law ? How do you read it ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , O ralma-riormu emkameni la hya ' maka ha rakota la Puka ralamni ?
He answered , You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart , with all your soul , with all your strength , and with all your mind , and your neighbor as yourself . ||| Noma riy de nwet la niwra , E rhorat targa la Puka ralamni totpa agala a ru'ru-la'yu , ralma-rio'ru la'pa a ih'ru-ralmu tetema pa aghima-rie ' a Uplerlawna Matromlawnu de . Me totpa agatu tiulla-siaynia ura ' a-upal wualia rimormior wia'lu pa emekwalima a'umkek rer lia a inon wamueh ' u .
He said to him , You have answered correctly . Do this , and you will live . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mak ompuet la re raplola pa mliernohora re , totpena mliernan mormiori-dardiari .
But he , desiring to justify himself , asked Jesus , Who is my neighbor ? ||| Mere tungkur agam de niwra ntot pa riy rwaror de , riy samomuou id e ' a . Pede natiana Yesus niwra , Hota rimormior he ' ed maka atiulla-siaynia ?
Jesus answered , A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho , and he fell among robbers , who both stripped him and beat him , and departed , leaving him half dead . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Muanke ' Yahudi ida nwatiawua Yerusalem pa niwra nla ' a Yeriko . Nla ' pa nler la talan letgar wa noma riy rwuri-rgalmua lawra-rayanni hyonni-hyanni honona me rliwra-rkakul nan de tete'-omiomia pa na'uhi-naklela la genni .
By chance a certain priest was going down that way . When he saw him , he passed by on the other side . ||| Ne edon nalo'on wali ne Yahudi kreini o'tani-matni imam ida nleret liola hande . La'pa namkek nana riy de , dewade nwotar doin la talla walli pa nodi liarni .
In the same way a Levite also , when he came to the place and saw him , passed by on the other side . ||| Emkade wal lia riy Lewi ida mak khi'inde khima-kre ' a Yahudi kreini o'tani-matni la Uplerlawna roma kreini nayanni , nlol wal lia hande , ne nma nwakriania pa la'pa namkek nana riy de namno ' a-namrara dewade nwotar doin la talla walli owa'an pa nodi liarni .
But a certain Samaritan , as he traveled , came where he was . When he saw him , he was moved with compassion , ||| Mere edon nalo'on wali ne riy Samaria ida maka nhi'inde Yahudi re rmakriarnia la ' a yala ' a plalahwa nleret liola hande noma la'pa nkil tiar la riy Yahudi de dewade ralamni ntuin doin la pa
came to him , and bound up his wounds , pouring on oil and wine . He set him on his own animal , brought him to an inn , and took care of him . ||| nwakriania na'nama nala arka me wu'rg atiawi na nagapnia no'oni-rarni na'nama newan pitga nhor nioma nkenia la keledai hananni pa nodi liarni la rom maka riy rpairia pa ranin la , na'nama nhapo ' a-nhakal lia hande .
On the next day , when he departed , he took out two denarii , gave them to the host , and said to him , ‘ Take care of him . Whatever you spend beyond that , I will repay you when I return . ' ||| La'pa repar noma nala kupan pi'ra dinar woru , de lera woru kaini , la ' a ora roma sniew de , na'nama nakot la niwra , Mhi ' kalwiedwed hadi ne la'pa hya ' to ' maka ka'an kupna , de hota a'uwali owa'an pa mua puairia .
Now which of these three do you think seemed to be a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers ? ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nwati ltierni la yawalliohor de na'nama Natiana hadilla riy de Niwra , La ' a riy mantetellu re de hameni ed maka khi ' a rimormior wialli pa emolmolan neka e nhi ' la inon wamueheni ?
He said , He who showed mercy on him . Then Jesus said to him , Go and do likewise . ||| Noma makwatutga agama mak katian de nwet la niwra , Riy maka ktulla-ksaynia la riy de ! Noma Yesus Niwra , La'pa emkade demade mlia'awa , ne mhi ' walia emkadella la he'-he ' to ' a
As they went on their way , he entered into a certain village , and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rodi liarni noma rte'ela la ' leta ida . La ' let de , de patke ' ida nwawa Marta nmai pia npolu-nwaka Yesus totpena Nla e romni nayanni .
She had a sister called Mary , who also sat at Jesus ' feet and heard his word . ||| Marta elli id ed wal lia nanni Maria . Maria di , e namtatan nohora Itmatromni Yesus pa natlina-natailla Yesus lirni-tunnu .
But Martha was distracted with much serving , and she came up to him , and said , Lord , do n't you care that my sister left me to serve alone ? Ask her therefore to help me . ||| Mere Marta nmakokan nohora tulanni-kniarni la romni nayanni . Noma Marta nla ' pa nakot la Yesus niwra , Matroma , O edonna Mpuolliohora Maria pa nma nor a ' u pua amkari ? Enamtatan rer tio ' a . Mhuopan pa nma nor a ' u pua amkar lia handi .
Jesus answered her , Martha , Martha , you are anxious and troubled about many things , ||| Noma Itmatromni Nakot la Marta Niwra , O e muakokan nohora haneknek wawannu , Marta .
but one thing is needed . Mary has chosen the good part , which will not be taken away from her . ||| Mere maka Uplerlawna Nwahaka de nwal tio'ola ida nmeh ' a taru , de hya ' maka Maria ha nwalir nian de . Pa hota A ' g edonna wuayotil targ e ' pa edonna natlin rer lia A li'ru-tu'nu ri .
When he finished praying in a certain place , one of his disciples said to him , Lord , teach us to pray , just as John also taught his disciples . ||| La'awa la lera ida noma Yesus Nsumbain la geni ida . Nsumbain pa nhorwua noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a ida nakot la niwra , Matroma , Mpuatut tiek am lia sniumbaini pa emekwalima Yohansi nwatutga la maka ha nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rsumbaini .
He said to them , When you pray , say , ‘ Our Father in heaven , may your name be kept holy . May your Kingdom come . May your will be done on earth , as it is in heaven . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La ' miy sniumbainmi de mikot emkadilla , A Am mamni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha ! O ' de Mueh ' a Mupriri-mukded la genmu-tienmu . Ampak de nhiu'ru-nhielma ya'unni-yamta'ata nmai reri O ' dee ! Ampei-mnar reria lodanmu-hairmu . Ampaka pa O ralma-riormu de , mak kden la noha wawannu rlernohor reria pa emekwalima maka ha rhi ' a la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Give us day by day our daily bread . ||| Mhi ' apehera a apun mamni la ' yamanan mak Omual pa ama'an la ' lera-lera .
Forgive us our sins , for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is indebted to us . Bring us not into temptation , but deliver us from the evil one . ' ||| Mumou-muwitna a do ' a-hal mamni yoma am miana mhoratdoinia riy do'oni-halli mai ami . Ne yana Muolin doin limmu-mpue'er rormu mai ami , yanpa la'pa hegana-kawnu rta'ag am die , hota amler la do ' a-hala ralamni .
He said to them , Which of you , if you go to a friend at midnight and tell him , ‘ Friend , lend me three loaves of bread , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'an la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a Nnairi yawalliohora Niwra , La'pa riy id tiy miy nla ' a mutwualli romni la ' mela letargara , pa niwra , Hyalia , mual nana roti meheni wotel pa ama'ana pleinia ,
for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey , and I have nothing to set before him , ' ||| yoma a mutwua'lu id nwatiawu gen olieta pa nma nlola a ro'mu nayanni mere a yamanan mamni nhorwua !
and he from within will answer and say , ‘ Do n't bother me . The door is now shut , and my children are with me in bed . I ca n't get up and give it to you ' ? ||| Taplin niohora mutwualmi maka mimlia ' mpiak la de nwalol tiy miy niwra , E ! Yana muriei a ' u ! Agho'la wuent oleka a ro'mu nhiarni pa agora u'pu-a'nu manin olek am pia . A ' g edonna ga ' pua umat nohora miy polpuolmi-wakwakmi re !
I tell you , although he will not rise and give it to him because he is his friend , yet because of his persistence , he will get up and give him as many as he needs . ||| La'pa emkade de hota emkameni tiy miy ? La'pa miy mutwualmi ir ho'mana hota edonna namat pa nal hadom tiy miy . Mere mimpiesiaya , la'pa miy edonna mmiola-mmia ' a mpiakwak to'owa , de hota namat pa nala hare honona mak ha mpiaka re .
I tell you , keep asking , and it will be given you . Keep seeking , and you will find . Keep knocking , and it will be opened to you . ||| Pede Awuagahniorat miy Agiwra , mpiaka la Uplerlawna , hota mliernana , mpiahaka hota mia'nana . Mtiet la nhiari hota rhari nhiari tiy miy .
For everyone who asks receives . He who seeks finds . To him who knocks it will be opened . ||| Yoma riy mak kwaka de hota nlernana , mak kwahaka hota na ' nana me riy maka ktet la nhiari de hota rhari nhiari la .
Which of you fathers , if your son asks for bread , will give him a stone ? Or if he asks for a fish , he wo n't give him a snake instead of a fish , will he ? ||| La ' miy hononmi re , ama-hyali id a'nani nwaka pa na'ana i'na , de amni edon nal niy lia toh !
Or if he asks for an egg , he wo n't give him a scorpion , will he ? ||| Onde rwaka hiwi ternu pa ra'ana , miy edonna miala hodai !
If you then , being evil , know how to give good gifts to your children , how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him ? ||| La'pa rimormiori miy mak khi'inde khi ' do ' a-hala nekane miatu miala ha samomuounu la miy a'nami re , yaho'ma miy Amlawanmi mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha ! Hota E ' ed mak kala E Nhiwni la ' a riy maka kwak la E ' a .
He was casting out a demon , and it was mute . When the demon had gone out , the mute man spoke , and the multitudes marveled . ||| La ' lera ida ne Yesus Nhokar doinia hegana-kawnu la ' a riy mak kaplinu kaltieri hakamu . La'pa hegana-kawnu de nlergot wa dewade riy de naltier kalwiedwed wa pa rirahu re rwer rer wiawni la .
But some of them said , He casts out demons by Beelzebul , the prince of the demons . ||| Mere la ' dom de e riwra , Be'elsebul , hegana amlawanni de ed mak kala ruri-lai la Hade pede na Nhokra-nlai hegana-kawnu re .
Others , testing him , sought from him a sign from heaven . ||| Me riy dom de rtota Yesus la klieratni pede rhopan pa Yesus Ntutga hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona totpena irat muemna de Yesus plolli-mneheni nwatiawua Uplerlawna .
But he , knowing their thoughts , said to them , Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation . A house divided against itself falls . ||| Mere ira ralma-riorni re , Yesus Nat niohor momuoga . Pede Nakot la re Niwra , Hegana re emeknekama hairi ida . La'pa la hairi ida rimormiorni ema rhakre'era la wokni-wokni mak kahuri-kawo'ora , de hota hair de edonna namteman plalahwa . Me luwu-a'na ida nden rer lia yahuri-yawo'ora de hota rweyata-rwaniawua luwu-a'na de .
If Satan also is divided against himself , how will his kingdom stand ? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul . ||| Emkade walia la hegana amlawanni tnioranni-riautnu . La'pa hegana woka-le ' u ida , nhokra woka-le ' u dom to ' a , de hota hegana tnioranni-riautnu ema reyapie'era . A'ukot emkade yoma miy e miwra A ' g e ghokar doinia yatni-rha'ani Aniairi Be'elsebul plolli-mneheni .
But if I cast out demons by Beelzebul , by whom do your children cast them out ? Therefore they will be your judges . ||| La'pa mikot emkade mai A ' u nnia'eratni de hota mak klernohor miy niek de rnairia hegana amlawanni plolli-mneheni pa Nhokar doini hegana-kawnu . Mere maklernohor miy niek de rat niohora wniarormi de nhala .
But if I by God 's finger cast out demons , then God 's Kingdom has come to you . ||| Mere Aghokra-liaiya hegana-kawnu yatni-rha'ani re de Aniairi Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni . Ne hade e ntut mueman de Uplerlawna ed mak kodi plolli pa emeka Ray ne miy e mimkek nan oleka E rurni-laini .
When the strong man , fully armed , guards his own dwelling , his goods are safe . ||| Itala mak karuri-kalai ida pa itsi ' la yawalliohora . Hegana amlawanni de emeknekama mak karuri-kalai ida mak knairia keki-rautu penpuenu-tetema na natiaka romni , totpa yana riy ra'ala re'eni-tniarnu .
But when someone stronger attacks him and overcomes him , he takes from him his whole armor in which he trusted , and divides his plunder . ||| Mere A ' die de emeknekama riy ida mak kmai , mak rurni-laini nareh mieman la e ' a pa Atiowar nana na'nama Awuarui-wuate'la momuoga e kekni-rautnu maka enwarora de hota ed mak katiak nana e re'eni-tniarnu me Age'era-ghakre'era hyonni-hyanni re honona .
He who is not with me is against me . He who does n't gather with me scatters . ||| Mhioratreria ! Riy mak edonna rlernohor reri A ' u , de nnia'eratni de ir er maka khoklira-kpah ' a waw malawna mai A ' u . Ne riy edonna rhima-rre ' A ' u , nnia'eratni de hare er maka rweyata-rwaniawua A tulla-knia'ru !
The unclean spirit , when he has gone out of the man , passes through dry places , seeking rest , and finding none , he says , ‘ I will turn back to my house from which I came out . ' ||| La'pa yatni-rha'ani nahniokar doin la ' a riy ida ralamni , de loldoi-loldai lia wo'or kerkerna totpena nahak geni id owa'ana totpena nhu'ru ralma mere hota edonna nlernana . La ' hade pede yatni-rha'ani de wniarorni de hota nawali owa'an la riy de .
When he returns , he finds it swept and put in order . ||| La'pa nawal wia , de namkek de riy de nmou-nwitna olekwa emeka likti id maka ha rwahyar momuoga ne rwahi ' a-rwayod tiarga .
Then he goes and takes seven other spirits more evil than himself , and they enter in and dwell there . The last state of that man becomes worse than the first . ||| Noma nla ' owa'an pa nmai die nodia yatni-rha'ani wo'itu de yatni-halli nareh dioin memn owa'an la e ' a . Dewade ha rler la riy de ralamni owa'ana . Pede la'awa hohoni , de riy de nler la polpuol inni-wakwak amni mak karehi owa'an la ' ulul genni .
It came to pass , as he said these things , a certain woman out of the multitude lifted up her voice and said to him , Blessed is the womb that bore you , and the breasts which nursed you ! ||| La'pa Yesus Naltier rereri die dewade patke ' ida la rirahu re letgarni nhaunu pa nakot la Yesus niwra , Eee ! Inmu maka ka'uhu-ka'apnu O ' a la ' ler ululu , de nlernan unut lawna !
But he said , On the contrary , blessed are those who hear the word of God , and keep it . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , La ' plollolli de la ' a riy mak klernan unut lawna de he'-he ' to ' a maka katlina-katailia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu !
When the multitudes were gathering together to him , he began to say , This is an evil generation . It seeks after a sign . No sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet . ||| La'pa rirahu e rpepan reria Yesus noma Nakot lirni Niwra , Tuwu di , rimormioria yatyata-halala . Yoma rhopan pa Atiutga hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat id la ira totpena rpesiay A ' u . Mere hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona kuku ' nek ho'mana A ' g edon tiutga la ira . Eneknek to'ama mak makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yunus ha nlernan de .
For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites , so the Son of Man will also be to this generation . ||| Yoma Yunus mak kdella i'na apannu ralamni de emeknekama hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat id la ' a letlawna Niniwe de , ne emkade wal lia Rimormior A'nani A ' die hota Awual lia hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona id la ' rimormiori la ' a tuw di onnila hya ' maka hota Aliernana .
The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation and will condemn them , for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon , and behold , one greater than Solomon is here . ||| La'awa lera noha niatni , la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni , de hota pat maran mak kwatiawua weli tranna mata angin selatan ntutrieri pia nto'on reria riy tuwu di . Yoma pat maran de nwatiawua noha honi-rai tawnu olietleta pa nmai pia natlin nana wniatutu-wniaye ' a Salomo mak katu die . Mere la dodo'ondi de Agetla miy gaimi ralamni mere miy edon mitlin A li'ru pa mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin do'omi-halmi kennama A'ureh dioinia Salomo .
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation , and will condemn it , for they repented at the preaching of Jonah , and behold , one greater than Jonah is here . ||| La'pa la'awa lera noha niatni , la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni , de mak kden la Niniwe re mana hota rtutrieri pa rto'ona riy mak kmormior lia dodo'ondi . Yoma mak kden la Niniwe rhoitio'or doin-rtahnei dioini ir do'oni-halli , la ' lera Yunus nakot nohora Uplerlawna nnio'oni-niatnu la ira . Mere la ' dodo'ondi de Agetla miy gaimi ralamni mere miy edonna mitlin A li'ru pa mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin la do'omi-halmi , kennama A ' di de ureh dioini Yunus de .
No one , when he has lit a lamp , puts it in a cellar or under a basket , but on a stand , that those who come in may see the light . ||| Edonna rlernan ma'ta riy rtutin wa'du de rade ' a-ramoinia la hadom ralamni , onde rala ktopra ra rtutwua ai miormior die . Nhi'inde rkenia wa'du la ' a wniatatgenni totpena hameni maka kler la roma ralamni de namkek reria lelerni .
The lamp of the body is the eye . Therefore when your eye is good , your whole body is also full of light , but when it is evil , your body also is full of darkness . ||| Matmi de emekwalima wa'du la inonmi . La'pa matmi reprepra , de hota inonmi tetema mana nreprepra . Mere la'pa matmi yata , de emekwalima inonmi tetema mana nmela-nkalma .
Therefore see whether the light that is in you is n't darkness . ||| La ' hade pede orahnioratmi la ' temmi . Yanpa maka mimpiarora de lelerni de mak kden tiy miy mere plollolli de melli-kalamni hade .
If therefore your whole body is full of light , having no part dark , it will be wholly full of light , as when the lamp with its bright shining gives you light . ||| Pede la'pa inonmi tetema lelera , me oke ' mana edonna melmela-kalkalma , de hota inonmi de tetema nhitita-nreprepra pa emeknekama nden la wa'du taranni .
Now as he spoke , a certain Pharisee asked him to dine with him . He went in and sat at the table . ||| La'pa Yesus Naltier pia nhorwua , noma riy Parisi ida npolu-nwak pa nhi ' a nhiollia pa ra'ana-remnu . Pede Yesus Nlernohora la ' romni nayanni pa Namtatan wutga na'nama ra'ana .
When the Pharisee saw it , he marveled that he had not first washed himself before dinner . ||| Riy Parisi die nheran doin la yoma Yesus edon Nlernohora agama deullu-tatarni maka la'pa Na'an de Nwuri-nohma limni ulu .
The Lord said to him , Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter , but your inward part is full of extortion and wickedness . ||| Noma Itmatromlawanni Nakot la Niwra , Plola la riy Parisi miy die mhi ' emeknekama riy maka kwuri-kohma lola-wra ' u to'orni mere ralamni re edonna rohma pa nakdeha-naktiahli ma'ta , yoma mtiot pa mpiehwa-mliakta emekneka riy kalwiedweda mere riy yatyatni-halalli miy , mak kamatmer la rira hyonni-hyanni .
You foolish ones , did n't he who made the outside make the inside also ? ||| Miy podakmi lola miy tiermi ! Miplinga de Uplerlawna ed maka khi ' nana tio'ora me rialma ? !
But give for gifts to the needy those things which are within , and behold , all things will be clean to you . ||| Mere hota mial ralammi tetema pa mira ' a-mipalga la riy mak kakleha-kaplara , ne la'pa mhi ' emkade de hota inonmi tetema nor wutga ihrami-ralammi momuou rmou-rwitna .
But woe to you Pharisees ! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb , but you bypass justice and God 's love . You ought to have done these , and not to have left the other undone . ||| Mere hota riy Parisi miy die , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani ! Yawuli-yatniamanmi re emeknekama dwa'na , laso ' a me korni-tre'eni de nhi'inde miala nhiakra id ralamni la termida sepersepuluh la ' a Uplerlawna . Miala de naplola , mere miy edonna mtiutga nhiolia plola-mneha la rimormior wialmi , me edon mtiut walia ralam kalwiedmi la Uplerlawna . Maka plollolli de totpena mhi ' samomuou lia Uplerlawna Nor rimormior wialmi me yana mhioratdoin wal pia miala nhiakra id ralamni la termida sepersepuluh la ' a Uplerlawna .
Woe to you Pharisees ! For you love the best seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces . ||| Riy Parisi miy die , adoh ! Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani ! La'pa mlier la Yahudi kreini-iskolli de mpiahak gen miak kden la gaini , ne mihepru yoma mak kden la ya'olgeni rhi ' miy lia rekna-waiti .
Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! For you are like hidden graves , and the men who walk over them do n't know it . ||| Adoh ! Hota yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani e nhortiut nian miy ! Mtiutga inonmi emeka riy kalwiedweda mere miy ralamni de npenpuen lia yatni-halli . Emkade pede miy emeknekama hoi-kietra maka riy raplin niohora etla hande pede rlola wawannu yoma raplin niohora hoi eda de maka kpenpuen nohora hya ' maka kahuwu-kawoini .
One of the lawyers answered him , Teacher , in saying this you insult us also . ||| Noma tungkurga agama ida nakot la Yesus niwra , Tungkurga , la'pa Omukot nohora lir de , de O ' e Mupolu-mulielan wali ami .
He said , Woe to you lawyers also ! For you load men with burdens that are difficult to carry , and you yourselves wo n't even lift one finger to help carry those burdens . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hota mlier wal lia yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , yoma tungkuru miy die nhi'inde miala wniatutu-wniaye ' a emolmolan nekama mkienia kwar werwerat rehi la riy wawannu , mere miy edon mtiulan et miemna la riy totpena rlernohora wniatutmi-wniaye'emi re .
Woe to you ! For you build the tombs of the prophets , and your fathers killed them . ||| Adoh ! Hota mimlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani yoma miy e miwra mtiutga inon wamuehemi samomuounu yoma mpiedia hoi-kietra la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu ululu re . Mere miy die mana emolmolan nekama miy upmi-tgarmi maka rwen oleka makwohorulu-ktatrulu la ' ler delloo !
So you testify and consent to the works of your fathers . For they killed them , and you build their tombs . ||| Miy orgahami mtiutga de miy e mpiayow nohora orgahami upmi-tgarmi hihi'ini-yapyapni . Ir er maka kwunu-kwenna makwohorulu-ktatrulu re , pa hota plola miy er mak khi ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu hoini-kietarni re .
Therefore also the wisdom of God said , ‘ I will send to them prophets and apostles , and some of them they will kill and persecute , ||| La ' hade pede Uplerlawna mak katu hya ' a-hya ' a honona de Niwra , Hota A ' u'enyatga makwohorulu-ktatrulu rora riy makodia A li'ru-tu'nu , ne hota miy mak kmormior lia dodo'ondi mpienna doma , ne la dom de mimuki-mima'ala .
that the blood of all the prophets , which was shed from the foundation of the world , may be required of this generation , ||| Emkade pede hota miy mak kdella nohkerna la ' a lera-mela ri hota er maka kler la niukum werwerat memna yoma miy er mak kakwara riy mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de wniunnu-wnienanni la ' a ler maka Uplerlawna na'nama Nakoki-nayapi nohkeran di pa la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lera-mela ri .
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah , who perished between the altar and the sanctuary . ' Yes , I tell you , it will be required of this generation . ||| Hota mikwara Habel wniunnu-wnienanni pa nla ntut lia wnienna la makwohorulu-ktatrulu Sakaria , maka ha rwenna la Uplerlawna roma kreini nora katri'ana mesbah letgarni . Mpiesiaya ! Plol toto ' a pa wniunu-wnienna honona re , de hota tuwu di rakwar reria do ' a-hala re honona .
Woe to you lawyers ! For you took away the key of knowledge . You did n't enter in yourselves , and those who were entering in , you hindered . ||| Tungkuru agama miy , hota mimlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , yoma emeknekama miy er mak ktorreria konsi pa ma mhiaria rira o'tani-kriahlanu la ' a Uplerlawna yala'ani , mere emeknekama miy nek de mhioplial oleka konis de . Miat niohora nhioli-lieta ilu-wniehwa pa rlernohora Uplerlawna mere miy orgahami nek de edonna mliernohora Uplerlawna talanni de . Ne miy orgahami mana ed maka mtierteri-mtiatawa riy dom maka kiwra kat niohora .
As he said these things to them , the scribes and the Pharisees began to be terribly angry , and to draw many things out of him , ||| La'pa Yesus Nto'or la ' a gen die dewade tungkurga agama rora riy Parisi re roir reria Yesus . Honona re rtot pa rna'aili-rna'ailia Yesus totpena Nakot momuoga hya ' a-hya ' to ' a .
lying in wait for him , and seeking to catch him in something he might say , that they might accuse him . ||| Ne la ' hade de ir honona rta'wa reria tlinni la Yesus lirni-tunnu re totpena yanpa Yesus Nweta hya ' maka edon kla ' nana ir o'tani-matni ralamni de demade pleta-plet pa rla ' rwaghal Yesus la ' ira .
Meanwhile , when a multitude of many thousands had gathered together , so much so that they trampled on each other , he began to tell his disciples first of all , Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees , which is hypocrisy . ||| La ' ler de wal pia , rimormiori riwnu-halli rmai pia rawoka , de idma mpakdie'da la ida . Noma Yesus Nakot ulga la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Mierammi la ' temni la ' a riy Parisi re . Yanpa mimliernohora ir wniehwani-liakatni maka rtota inonni samomuou mere plollolli de riy yatyat ira munafik . Ir wniehwani re emeknekama tgo ' a maka oke ' to ' a maka ha rkenia la wetra ' ota tarigu pa nhi'nande nha'at momuou .
But there is nothing covered up that will not be revealed , nor hidden that will not be known . ||| Mere hihi'ini-yapyapni maka kayade ' a , hota rayamkek momuou , ne maka kayawunmua hota rat niohora momuou .
Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light . What you have spoken in the ear in the inner rooms will be proclaimed on the housetops . ||| Ne hota hya ' maka miy mipupua la rira tlinni ralamni me maka ha mpiahaur walia la mel'utni-malienni , de hota repra rauria , de riy rat niohora yoma hota rkakna la lol meni-meni to'owa .
I tell you , my friends , do n't be afraid of those who kill the body , and after that have no more that they can do . ||| A talanwa'lu miy hononmi mhioratreria ! Yan memmemna mimta'ata riy rwunu-rwenan miy inonmi . Yoma hota rwenan to ' a miy inonmi , mere ta'en niana ir rhi ' yawuhi-yawe'et la miy aranmi jiwa pa rla ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
But I will warn you whom you should fear . Fear him who after he has killed , has power to cast into Gehenna . Yes , I tell you , fear him . ||| Mai pia ukot nohora hota he ' ed maka mimta'ata . Mimta'at de , mimta'ata Uplerlawna . Yoma la'pa Nwunu-nwenan riy inonni , de Enodi plolli pa Nnaklia aranmi la ai mormiori ralamni naraka . Mpiesiaya A li'ru di . Uplerlawna nanpena mimta'ata .
Are n't five sparrows sold for two assaria coins ? Not one of them is forgotten by God . ||| La'pa ma'nu prowta mak kakleha weli id ho'mana hota Uplerlawna edonna Nhortaplinga de .
But the very hairs of your head are all counted . Therefore do n't be afraid . You are of more value than many sparrows . ||| La'pa mortu lihirmi la ' o'tami ho'mana Uplerlawna Nat niohora momuou . La ' hade pede yan mimta'ata . Yoma Uplerlawna Nsayn miy me Ntera-ndem miy nareh dioin meman la ma'nu prowta re .
I tell you , everyone who confesses me before men , the Son of Man will also confess before the angels of God , ||| Mhioratrer samomuoga ! Riy maka kwayow nohor pesiayni mai A ' u la ' a rimormiori gaini ralamni , de hota Rimormior A'na A ' die mana hota wuayow nohor e ' a la ' a Uplerlawna Nora E hopopanni-lili'irnu re gaini ralamni , Agiwra A mu'tu-rah ' u id e ' a .
but he who denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of God 's angels . ||| Mere la'pa hameni ed mak kreher pa kiwra e ' edon nlernohora A lia rimormiori gaini ralamni , de hota Rimormiori A'na A ' die mana hota rieher doin walia e ' a la ' a Uplerlawna Nor E hopopanni re gaini ralamni .
Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven , but those who blaspheme against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven . ||| La'pa he ' ed mak kapolu-kaliella Rimormior A'na A ' die , de hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli de , mere la'pa hameni ed mak kapolu-kaliella Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , de hota Uplerlawna edon Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli de .
When they bring you before the synagogues , the rulers , and the authorities , do n't be anxious how or what you will answer or what you will say , ||| La'pa rod miy lia ' a geni-tien maka Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli de , pa rhudi-rpar miy lia , onde rodi miy la ' a o'ta-mat lalawna gaini ralamni onde mak ktorna horta-hairi pa rhudi-rpar miy , de yan memmemna ihrami rteplu la ' a hota mniairia hya ' lir pa mia mhieri-mhielta inonmi .
for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that same hour what you must say . ||| Yoma la ' a hya ' ed maka hota ha mikota , de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli maka Nkar lia miy ralamni pa mikota hare , la ' ler maka ha rod lia ' a-rod maiya miy lia re !
One of the multitude said to him , Teacher , tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me . ||| Noma riy id la ' a riy mutlialawna re nakot la Yesus niwra , Tungkur Yesus e ! Mtia ' tieka lirmu la hya'lu totpena nal teka amro ' a ina-am mamni re'eni-tniarnu oke ' a mai a ' u .
But he said to him , Man , who made me a judge or an arbitrator over you ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hyalia , he ' ed maka kran A ' pua A lia godi plolli pa ghakra mimrio ' a re'emi-tniarmi ? !
He said to them , Beware ! Keep yourselves from covetousness , for a man 's life does n't consist of the abundance of the things which he possesses . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nwagahniorta riy honona mak kden la hande pa Niwra , Erammi la temmi ! Yan memmemna mpial lia riy maka kapal niana kupna-kai , re ' a-tniaru . Yoma rira mormiorni edonna nawniair la re'eni-tniar wamueheni , kennama re'eni-tniar liawan memna .
He spoke a parable to them , saying , The ground of a certain rich man produced abundantly . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot nohora yawalliohora dilla ira , pa Niwra , La ' riy makre ' a-maktaru ida gahani nhyi ' a-tlunni maka kpoti-kaduw nohora yawuli-yatniamni mak kodia pripanni-fa'anni .
He reasoned within himself , saying , ‘ What will I do , because I do n't have room to store my crops ? ' ||| Noma nwarora de , Hota gen mieni owa'an pa akenia noh di wullu-we'elli ? La ' dodo'ondi de aghi ' hya ' o ?
He said , ‘ This is what I will do . I will pull down my barns , build bigger ones , and there I will store all my grain and my goods . ||| Noma nmeh ' a nekpa naltiertier lia orgahi niwra , Dudnu-dudnu honona , aghopan nekpa rweyata-rwaniawua , ne awuatatg owa'ana warwuarnu maka inponni . Totpena la ' honona re de awuatierun tar momuoga metma wetra ' lawna re honona , me re ' a-tniaru re korni re honona wali .
I will tell my soul , Soul , you have many goods laid up for many years . Take your ease , eat , drink , and be merry . ' ||| Nhor nianpena a orgah ' u ukot owa'an la ' a a orgah ' u giwra , Adoh ! Aliernana oleka pripanni-fa'anni la ' a hare honona mak samomuou , pede hota awuatierun targa hare honona . A ' g edon kari owa'ana mere awuei tio ' pa a'una-gegemnu me ghi ' hya ' mak khi ' a ralmu pa nahepru .
But God said to him , ‘ You foolish one , tonight your soul is required of you . The things which you have prepared-whose will they be ? ' ||| Mere Uplerlawna hota Nakot la riy de Niwra , Hoi ! Podkge ! Hota mel di meman pa omuat wia . Ne hota he ' ed maka klernan o re'emu-tniarmu maka ha muwoka totpena orgahamu mu'un lola-muemun lola reno ? !
So is he who lays up treasure for himself , and is not rich toward God . ||| Emkadella la ' a riy maka kmeh ' a kwahak pa nre ' a-ntaru , mere nahmena nwahaka re ' a-tniar inhatta maka samoga la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
He said to his disciples , Therefore I tell you , do n't be anxious for your life , what you will eat , nor yet for your body , what you will wear . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , La ' hade pede mhioratreria , yan mimta'at nohora hya ' mak hota ha mi'ina-miemnia , me hota ha mhiewta-mniairia .
Life is more than food , and the body is more than clothing . ||| Yoma mormior die narehia ya'ana-yemnu , ne inonmi de nareh niana hewewta-naniairi .
Consider the ravens , they do n't sow , they do n't reap , they have no warehouse or barn , and God feeds them . How much more valuable are you than birds ! ||| Mimkek teka la ma'nu kakaka . Ir edonna rawuli-ratniamni me edonna rreiki-rwo'ora me rakleh walia dudnu-dudnu pa rwatiernia ya'ana-yemun la . La'pa emkade ho'mana Uplerlawna Ntera-ndem wali ira . Ne Uplerlawna Nsaynia miy die nareh dioin la onu-ma'nu re !
Which of you by being anxious can add a cubit to his height ? ||| Rimormiori maka ralamni worwuorga onde namta'ata matmiatni ho'mana takeni nhaur nan aranni oke ' nmeh ' a totpena edonan nmati .
If then you are n't able to do even the least things , why are you anxious about the rest ? ||| Ne la'pa hade nek de kuku ' ho'mana takeni miy e mhi ' nana , hya ' ed mak karei pia mimta'ata nohora miy mormiormi la ' a hare honona maka mi'ina-miemun me maka mhiewta-mniairi ? !
Consider the lilies , how they grow . They do n't toil , neither do they spin , yet I tell you , even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these . ||| Mimkek la kihir mak kadeutu re mormiorni . Kihir mak kadeutu re , edonna rkari , me edonna ratenni-ramairi . Mere mhioratreria , ray Salomo mak kre ' a-ktar die nek de edonna nhewta-nnairia naniairia samomuounu pa emeknekama kihir mak kadeutu re .
But if this is how God clothes the grass in the field , which today exists and tomorrow is cast into the oven , how much more will he clothe you , O you of little faith ? ||| Wewna mak kden la rai mtatanni re rmor lia ler di , mere repar dewade rhoklai la . Wewan nek de Uplerlawna ed maka nhi'inde Nahowna-nakgara pede samoga la yamkekni . Mere miy die edon mpiesiaya de wewna nek de Uplerlawna Ntera-ndema ne hota yaho'ma miy ? !
Do n't seek what you will eat or what you will drink , neither be anxious . ||| Yana wniarormi-wnialaimi nod rer tio'ola hya ' maka hota ha mi'ina-miemnia , me yana mimta'at nohora .
For the nations of the world seek after all of these things , but your Father knows that you need these things . ||| Yoma riy mak kaplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna , nek de er maka kahakhak nohora hare honona . Mere miy Amlawanmi Nat niohor olekwa de miy e mpiaka perlu hare honona .
But seek God 's Kingdom , and all these things will be added to you . ||| Pede mpiahak ulga totpena Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la ' a miy mormiormi-dardiarmi , ne hota hya ' maka mikleha de hota Enal momuoga tiy miy .
Do n't be afraid , little flock , for it is your Father 's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom . ||| La ' miy mutmi de riy doma rmeh ' a mere emkade ho'mana yan mimta'ata . Yoma miy Amlawanmi ralamni napranrana nahepru pa Nal miy pia mior E ' pa miodi plolli .
Sell what you have and give gifts to the needy . Make for yourselves purses which do n't grow old , a treasure in the heavens that does n't fail , where no thief approaches and no moth destroys . ||| Mi'ol dioini miy re'emi-tniarmi pa mial welli la maka a'na riy kapatyata . Emkade pede miwok wutga re ' a-tniaru plollola la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , mak emolmolan nekama kupna genni mak edonna kyata . Re ' a-tniar die la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , de taken niana rahor doinia la , makamnelu-kamna ' a taken niana rwuri-rgalam nana , ne erieri edonna na'an wal lia .
For where your treasure is , there will your heart be also . ||| Pede miwoka re ' a-tniaru la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha yoma hota la meni pa miy re'emi-tniarmi erla de hota miy ralammi et wal lia hande .
Let your waist be dressed and your lamps burning . ||| Yan minin matmi mere mpiahi ' pa mkiar lia Uplerlawna kniarni pa emeknekama riy maka raini nden rer lia temni , me wa'duni mana yana nmati .
Be like men watching for their lord when he returns from the wedding feast , that when he comes and knocks , they may immediately open to him . ||| Mhi ' emolmolan nekama hopopna-lili'iru mak edonna kanin matni la rwei-rnara tunni npolan la ' a yawok mehlima . Totpena la'pa tunni de nmai pia nkorkor la nhiari , de nleretniekla rhari nhiari la tunni de .
Blessed are those servants whom the lord will find watching when he comes . Most certainly I tell you that he will dress himself , make them recline , and will come and serve them . ||| Eee ! Hopopna-lili'iru re rlernana unut lawna , yoma tunni de nmai die e ramatmat ee ! Mpiesiayo , hota tun de nek de nwahi ' a-nwayod pia nhima-nre ' hopopanni re . Hota nwak pa hopopanni-lili'irnu de ramtatna pa ra'ana ne orgahani nhima-nre ' a re .
They will be blessed if he comes in the second or third watch and finds them so . ||| Eee ! Rlernan unut lawn ee ! Yoma ir tunni de nmai die nlernana ir mat lia wniei la ' a mela letgargarni , onde repreparreria ho'mana edonna ranin ma'ta .
But know this , that if the master of the house had known in what hour the thief was coming , he would have watched and not allowed his house to be broken into . ||| Mhioratreria , yawalliohora id owa'an hadi . La'pa orroma nat niohora hya ' a lera-mela mak kamna ' a nma nkamna ' a la e romni , de hota e natiak reri totpena mak kamna ' a yana na'unut nan e ' a .
Therefore be ready also , for the Son of Man is coming in an hour that you do n't expect him . ||| Ne hota miy miana emkade walia . Mitiak reria ! Mitlin reri-mitail rer lia Uplerlawna lirni , yoma Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota muai owa'an de emeknekama makwuri-kgalmu la melmela mak riy raplin niohora .
Peter said to him , Lord , are you telling this parable to us , or to everybody ? ||| Noma Petrus natiana la Yesus , Matromlawnu ne , hota wniatut die Matro'mu Nal to ' a ma ' ami , onde la ' riy honona wali ?
The Lord said , Who then is the faithful and wise steward , whom his lord will set over his household , to give them their portion of food at the right times ? ||| Noma Itmatromni Nakot la Niwra , Hota la ' he ' tiy miy , mhi ' inonni pa emeka hopopna-lili'iru maka khu'ru-khelma me natu natlina-nataili ? Hopopna mak emkade upni-matromni mana nran e ' pa nla ' o'tani la ' hopopanni-lili'irnu korni totpena e ' ed mak khakra mutwualli re ya'anni-yemannu la ' a lelera-melmela re .
Blessed is that servant whom his lord will find doing so when he comes . ||| Hota hopopan mak kdenrer lia kniarni de hota nlernan unut lawna , yoma matromni nawal pia nmai die nlernan entepartarlia tulla-kniari .
Truly I tell you that he will set him over all that he has . ||| Mpiesiayo , hota upni-matromni de npesiaya riy de pede nran e ' pa nwal lia mak klina-kmata la e re'eni-tniarnu honona .
But if that servant says in his heart , ‘ My lord delays his coming , ' and begins to beat the menservants and the maidservants , and to eat and drink and to be drunken , ||| Mere la'pa hopopna-lili'iru de nwarora la ralamni hota upni-matromni mahneka nanpena nmai . Pede nliwra-nkaklia e kniarwialli re patke ' a rora muanke ' a , ne na'ana-nemun pa npehera-nma'wu .
then the lord of that servant will come in a day when he is n't expecting him and in an hour that he does n't know , and will cut him in two , and place his portion with the unfaithful . ||| Dewade upni-matromni de nawal pia nmai wia la ' a lera-mel maka hopopan de naplin niohora . Pa nhi'nande upni-matromni nukmua werwerta riy de ne nhokar doinia pa nre ' wut lia riy maka edonna ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna .
That servant who knew his lord 's will , and did n't prepare nor do what he wanted , will be beaten with many stripes , ||| Riy maka kat niohora tunni ralma-riorni , mere edonna nwahi ' a-nwayodi pa nlernohora upni-matromni de ralma-riorni , de hota rliwra mantiarga la genni .
but he who did n't know , and did things worthy of stripes , will be beaten with few stripes . To whomever much is given , of him will much be required , and to whom much was entrusted , of him more will be asked . ||| Mere la ' riy mak kaplin niohora upni-matromni ralma-riorni , nwehwa sal , pa upni-matromni nliwra-nkaklia , hota liwliwarni edonna nwerta . Yoma riy maka Uplerlawna Nala ruri-lai onde Uplerlawna Nal oleka pa nodi plolli la rimormior wialli , de hota la'pa edon natlin la Uplerlawna lirni de , hota Uplerlawna Nto'on reri narehia riy dom to ' a .
I came to throw fire on the earth . I wish it were already kindled . ||| Amuai pia ghakra rimormiori mak khi ' samomuou la ' riy mak khi ' yatyatni pa emeknekama ai mak ka'an ora-au mak edon karuri me mak karuri de edon na'ana . A ralmu edon namtemna yoma A ' g edon ghi ' hade pa nhorwua .
But I have a baptism to be baptized with , and how distressed I am until it is accomplished ! ||| Amueh ' a neka hota lier la yamuki-yama'ala la'pa matmiati-molmuolu . Ne A ih'ru-ralmu teptieplia yoma A ' g edonna Aliernan ma'ta re !
Do you think that I have come to give peace in the earth ? I tell you , no , but rather division . ||| Yanpa miy miatniekame Amuai die Agod niek riy mak kden la nohkeran di wawannu pa rora rimormior wialli re rkalwieda . Hota edon emkade , mere mpiesiaya ! Onnila A rerie'yu pede riy id nor rimormior wialli re rahuri-rawo'ora .
For from now on , there will be five in one house divided , three against two , and two against three . ||| La'pa lera-mela ri de roma ida mniotni riy wolima de hota riy wotelu rpesiay A ' u me korni de edonna , onde riy woru rpesiaya mere korni edonna , nhi'nande la ' rom de rahuri-rawo'ora . Hota emkade pa nodi liarni .
They will be divided , father against son , and son against father , mother against daughter , and daughter against her mother , mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law , and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law . ||| Hota ama nora a'nani muanke ' a rawowo'ora . Ina nora a'nani patke ' a mana rawo'ora . Hota ina nora yananni patke ' a idma nwohora-ntatr ida .
He said to the multitudes also , When you see a cloud rising from the west , immediately you say , ‘ A shower is coming , ' and so it happens . ||| Yesus Nakot wal lia ' rirahu Niwra , La'pa mimkek nana kakma nha ' a la warta , de hota mlieretniekla miwra , Hota otna , ne plola otna nturu .
When a south wind blows , you say , ‘ There will be a scorching heat , ' and it happens . ||| Ne la'pa mieram nana anni nten lia tranna , de miwra , Hota lera nhit panpahna . Ne plola pahna .
You hypocrites ! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky , but how is it that you do n't interpret this time ? ||| Hoi ! Miy die mtiot inonmi emeka riy mak kat niohor Uplerlawna yala'ani de mere plollolli de miplin niohora ! La'pa mimkek la ' a kakam larlara onde mieram nana anni nteni , de miat niohora hota otna onde hota pahna . Ne nihya'pa mimkek nana A hihi ' u-yapya'pu me mitlin la A li'ru-tu'nu mere edonna mnia'erit nana ? !
Why do n't you judge for yourselves what is right ? ||| Nihya'pa miy orgahami edonna mpiaror nohora hya ' mak kaplola totpena mliernohora ? !
For when you are going with your adversary before the magistrate , try diligently on the way to be released from him , lest perhaps he drag you to the judge , and the judge deliver you to the officer , and the officer throw you into prison . ||| La'pa he ' ed maka kod miy la ' a watghudi lokarni hakim , de mpiahak talan pa miora riy de mkialwied nohora lira-tun die la ' a talan letgar memna . Yoma la'pa edonan de hota riy de nhed miy lia ' a makhudi-makpara mak hota nal owa'an miy lia hgei mak kodia hapa'pani polisi o'tani ne hota hgei de nho'la miy lia roma nhio'la ralamni .
I tell you , you will by no means get out of there until you have paid the very last penny . ||| Mimpiesiayo , hota miy edon mliergot la roma nhio'la ralamni la'pa rwei pia mpiair dioinia papiairmi honona .
Now there were some present at the same time who told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices . ||| La ' ler de , riy rwahauria la Yesus la ' a riy Galilea dom maka Pilatus nwunu-nwenna , la'pa rtepartarlia rala nhioini-tnianni persembahan la Uplerlawna .
Jesus answered them , Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans , because they suffered such things ? ||| La'pa Natlin samomuoga wniahaur de noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Yoma riy Galilea rlernan yawunu-yawenna mak emkade , de hota mpiarora de hare do'oni-halli re rarehelia riy mutlialawan mak kden la Galilea korni rena ? !
I tell you , no , but unless you repent , you will all perish in the same way . ||| Wniaror de nhala ! Mere mpiahniorta ! La'pa miy edonna mhioitio'or doini-mtiahnei dioinia miy do'omi-halmi , miy hononmi nek de hota mlier wal lia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them-do you think that they were worse offenders than all the men who dwell in Jerusalem ? ||| Emkade wal lia ' riy termida wehrani wo'awa , maka rom tutulu ida napru'wu pa nutin wenna ir la Siloam , la ' a Yerusalem letni . Hota miatniekame hare do'oni-halli rarehia mak kden la Yerusalem korni pede rom tutul die nutin wenna re ? !
I tell you , no , but , unless you repent , you will all perish in the same way . ||| Wniaror de nhala . A'ukot owa'ana ralamni tiy miy . La'pa miy edonna mhioitio'or doini-mtiahnei dioini do'omi-halmi , miy hononmi nek de hota mlier walia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
He spoke this parable . A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard , and he came seeking fruit on it and found none . ||| Hade nhorwua noma Yesus Nwahaur nohora walia yawalliohor di . Niwra , La ' a nhyi ' a lokrahi ida de ora nhyi ' de ntamin walia kar ona ida . La'pa lera ida noma ora nhyi ' de nla nwahaka kar de wo'oni , mere edonna nlernan et wo'oni ida la .
He said to the vine dresser , ‘ Behold , these three years I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree , and found none . Cut it down ! Why does it waste the soil ? ' ||| Noma nakot la riy mak katiaka nhyi ' de niwra , Tamkek la anni wotel mak klardoini olekwa de amua wuahaka kar de wo'oni . Mere a ' g edonna liernan etia wo'oni ida . Pa mhioi wro'ona la ! Samomuounu de ittamnia onni id owa'an mak hota kmori la tan ihi di !
He answered , ‘ Lord , leave it alone this year also , until I dig around it and fertilize it . ||| Mere mak katiaka nhyi ' de nwak lir la niwra , Yana Tuna , ndena plein la pa tamkek teka la anin dina . Tuna ! Pena a'uwlia ' tani la walli-walli , nanpena akenia pip tie ' la !
If it bears fruit , fine , but if not , after that , you can cut it down . ' ||| Yanpa anin li'ir di nanpena nawo ' a mere la'pa tamkek la pa edonna nadeutu nanpena tuna nhopan pa retan doinia la .
He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath day . ||| Lera ida , la ' Sabat lerni maka Yahudi edon rkar lia de de Yesus Ntepartarlia wniatutu la ' a gen miaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli de .
Behold , there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years . She was bent over and could in no way straighten herself up . ||| La ' hande de patke ' a ida enado'or nohora mehrani la ' a anni termida wehrani wo'awa yoma hegana nhu ' r ralma . Patke ' de to'orni nkokioili ne taken niana nwalle'era onni pa ntutrieri kdededa .
When Jesus saw her , he called her and said to her , Woman , you are freed from your infirmity . ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek tar lia dewade Npolga pa Niwra , Ina , mmuai ee ! Nmai noma Nakot la Niwra , Dodo'ondi de Aghi ' kalwied o ' a !
He laid his hands on her , and immediately she stood up straight and glorified God . ||| Noma Yesus Nran limni la patke ' de wawannu dewade mtatan de nekpa nnienni-nhienni nmolu , ne pat de mana na'ulia-nawedia Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
The ruler of the synagogue , being indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath , said to the multitude , There are six days in which men ought to work . Therefore come on those days and be healed , and not on the Sabbath day ! ||| La ' noma o'ta-mat la gen miak Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli de nawenan doin la yoma Yesus Nhi ' kalwieda makamehra la ' a Sabat lerni . La hade pede o'ta-mat de nawenan pa nakot la riy honona mak kden la re niwra , Hoi ! Mitlin pa a'ukota . La ' a krei id ralamni de itkar lia lera wonema , pa la ' lera matnemnema re de mai pia mhi ' kalwieda mehra-maumi re ! Mere mitlina ! Yan memmemna mmiai lia ' Sabat lerni emeka ler di . Mhioratreri oo !
Therefore the Lord answered him , You hypocrites ! Does n't each one of you free his ox or his donkey from the stall on the Sabbath and lead him away to water ? ||| Noma Itmatromni Yesus Nakot la , Niwra , Hoi ! Miy mtiota inonmi de emeka riy kalwiedweda mere la ' plolli de miy edon pusin nohora hya ' ed mak kaplola munafik ! La ' a Sabat lerni de miy hononmi miewar doinia nhiurmi-wnia'anmi pa miodia pa mlia mtip ger la remnia .
Ought not this woman , being a daughter of Abraham whom Satan had bound eighteen long years , be freed from this bondage on the Sabbath day ? ||| Nah , mai handi de Abrahama duratni-waitni patke ' a ida e namehra nan la anni termida wehrani wo'aw memna yoma la ' a wutwutu-kokgohu la hegana amlawanni . Pa emkameni owa'an pa mikota yana twe'er doinia la ' a wutwutu-kokgohonu la ' a Sabat lerni dina ? !
As he said these things , all his adversaries were disappointed , and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him . ||| Yesus lirni de Nhi ' amola-ma ' memna riy maka nhi'inde rora Yesus rwa'eriai mere la riy dom to ' a re rahepur nohora Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni mak samomuou memna re .
He said , What is God 's Kingdom like ? To what shall I compare it ? ||| Noma Yesus Natiana Niwra , La'pa Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu la E rimormiori wawannu de emkameni la yala'ani ? Hota Agala yawalliohora hya ' a pa Aga ukot nohora harena ?
It is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and put in his own garden . It grew and became a large tree , and the birds of the sky live in its branches . ||| Hota ha yala'ani emeknekama yawalliohor di . La'pa ha rtamni sasawi ola ida la nhyi'ini , sasawi ol de nmor pia olli-tapalli re rpoti-rkadwu , ne onu-ma'nu rma rapuon la ' a sasaw die tutnu-akni .
Again he said , To what shall I compare God 's Kingdom ? ||| Ralamni owa'an pa Yesus Natiana Niwra , Hota Agala yawalliohora hya ' pa ga ukot nohora Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu la E rimormiori wawannu ?
It is like yeast , which a woman took and hid in three measures of flour , until it was all leavened . ||| Uplerlawna rimormiorni yehwani emolmolan nekama tgo ' maka a'na patke ' a ida na ' nana pa la nawotra-nawah ' a wutga la wetra ' ota kilu terampwogata pa nha'ata mneneha .
He went on his way through cities and villages , teaching , and traveling on to Jerusalem . ||| La ' a talla plahwani maka Yesus Nlola pa Nla'awa la ' Yerusalem de Yesus Nwatutu-nwaye ' lolola la ' a leta-ruhun maka Ha Nlolola re !
One said to him , Lord , are they few who are saved ? He said to them , ||| Noma riy ida natiana niwra , Tuna , hota riy doma rmeh ' a mak klernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni ? Noma Yesus Nakot la mak katlina re Niwra ,
Strive to enter in by the narrow door , for many , I tell you , will seek to enter in and will not be able . ||| Mihak totpena dodo'ondi de mpiakdie'da lola nhiar miaka kakmamah ' a , yoma mhioratreria , hota rirahu riwra rlola mere hota edonna rlernana .
When once the master of the house has risen up and has shut the door , and you begin to stand outside and to knock at the door , saying , ‘ Lord , Lord , open to us ! ' then he will answer and tell you , ‘ I do n't know you or where you come from . ' ||| Yoma hota orroma namat pa nkahro'pa nhiarni . Pa hota miy miak edon kla ' ma'ta la rialam de e mtiutrier pia mtiepartarlia mkorkora nhiari pa miwra , Tuna mhuar niana nhiari mai ami ee ! Mere hota tun de niwra , A ' g e uplin miy , me hya ' noh miy ?
Then you will begin to say , ‘ We ate and drank in your presence , and you taught in our streets . ' ||| Noma hota mimpiahla lirni miwra , O e muplin niohora ami ? Ami e mak kor O ' pa ka'ana-kemun wutu , me tuna O ' orgahamu ed maka kwatutu-kwaye ' wali am lia loi-talan mak klola a let mamni ralamni , noma O ' edonna Mhua'wa nan ami ? !
He will say , ‘ I tell you , I do n't know where you come from . Depart from me , all you workers of iniquity . ' ||| Mere hota tun de nakot owa'ana niwra , A ' g e uplin miy di de me miy e mpiatiawu hya ' noha-hya ' rai ? Rhokar doin miy lia handi , miy maka khi ' a yatyatni-halalli !
There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth when you see Abraham , Isaac , Jacob , and all the prophets in God 's Kingdom , and yourselves being thrown outside . ||| Ne hota la'pa mimkek tutga Abraham nora Isak me Yakop me la ' walia makwohorulu-ktatrulu re honona ramuki-rahepur la ' a Uplerlawna geni miaka Ntorna-nrautu emeka Ray . Mere miy die mpiolpuol inmi-mpiakwak ammi onnila rnaklia miy lia Uplerlawna genni de walli tio'ora !
They will come from the east , west , north , and south , and will sit down in God 's Kingdom . ||| Hota riy mak edon kwatiawu Israel mere rwatiawua tipru , warta , ra ' i , tranna hota rmai pia ramuki-rahepru la ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna la gen miaka Uplerlawna Ntorna-nraut de !
Behold , there are some who are last who will be first , and there are some who are first who will be last . ||| Plol meman la , hota riy maka ktawli'iru la rira yamkekni rmai die rwal tiargho'ola mak kala ' ulu me mak kala ' ulu rwal tiargho'ola riy mak ktawli'iru .
On that same day , some Pharisees came , saying to him , Get out of here and go away , for Herod wants to kill you . ||| La ' ler de mana riy Parisi wo'ira rmai pia rakot la Yesus riwra , Mpuaran pa Mlia'awa la ' a gen dom to ' a , yoma Herodes e niwra nwen O ' a .
He said to them , Go and tell that fox , ‘ Behold , I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow , and the third day I complete my mission . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mlia ' pa mikot la Herodes mak kputra-kpalka klili-kdiori de , miwra hota A ' g edon umta'ata e ' a , mere la ' ler dina me repar de hota Agiwra ghokar doinia yatni-rha'ani me Aghi ' kalwieda ma'ta mak kamehra-kamau ne hota la lera wotellu de hota A'uhorga A knia'ru .
Nevertheless I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the next day , for it ca n't be that a prophet would perish outside of Jerusalem . ' ||| La ' emkameni ho'mana hota Agodia lia'ru pa Akari la ler di , ne repar de nodi liarni pa repra owa'an pa walli owa'ana . Nhorwua nanpena Alia ' Yerusalem . La ' ler de na'nama ratuinia A arnu mati la Yerusalem . Yoma riwra rwenna makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida , de nhi'inde ratuin nieka la ' a Yerusalema letni ralamni , edonna la ' a Yerusalem to'orni .
Jerusalem , Jerusalem , you who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her ! How often I wanted to gather your children together , like a hen gathers her own brood under her wings , and you refused ! ||| Neee ! Makden Yerusalem miy ee ! Miy er mak kwunu-kwenna makwohorulu-ktatrulu re me mpiatliewur wenna riy maka Uplerlawna Nhopna rtiy miy die . Makden Yerusalem miy ee ! A ' g e uhak memna olek la re'eni wo'ir meman pa Agiwra ghi ' miy pia emeknekama hiwi tei mak kreka-krek a'nani la liwarni nayanni mere mihmena mitlin la A polpuo'lu !
Behold , your house is left to you desolate . I tell you , you will not see me until you say , ‘ Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord ! ' ||| La ' hade pede mitlino ! Hota Uplerlawna Nolin limni la miy letmi . Pena miatgo , la ' ler di pa ntutu-nte'ela ler mak Amuai owa'ana , de hota miy edon mimkek eti A ' u . La ' A maimia'yu lerni de nampena miwra , Makodia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni Nmai wiee ! Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi , tlilili-tmamuawua !
When he went into the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat bread , they were watching him . ||| La ' a Sabat lerni noma Yesus la ' Na'an la ' a riy Parisi makhi ' o'ta-mata ida romni . La'pa Yesus Nler la rom de nayanni de o'ta-mata Yahudi ramkek rer lia Yesus .
Behold , a certain man who had dropsy was in front of him . ||| La ' Yesus gaini ralamni riy ida limni-lakni rpetan wenna .
Jesus , answering , spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees , saying , Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath ? ||| Noma Yesus Natiana makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rora riy Parisi mak kden la hande niwra , Emkameni la it agamni deullu-tatarni ? Nhi'inde la ' a Sabat lerni de ita tsi ' kalwied wal lia riy maka kamehra-kamau me edonna ?
But they were silent . He took him , and healed him , and let him go . ||| Mere makwatutu-kwaye ' a re rora riy Parisi re mtulu-mtie'ela . Dewade Yesus Nran limni la riy de wawannu ne Nhi ' kalwieda la nnienni-nhienni de , na'nama Nhopan pa nla'awa .
He answered them , Which of you , if your son or an ox fell into a well , would n't immediately pull him out on a Sabbath day ? ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot la riy mak kden hande niwra , Agal teka yawalliohor di tiy miy . La'pa miy a'nami ida onde miy pipmi-dummi ida ntuin tar lia gera tnipu id ralamni la ' a Sabat lerni de hota milgota toh !
They could n't answer him regarding these things . ||| Mere la ' riy id mana edon nakot hadomdom pa nwahla Yesus yatianni de .
He spoke a parable to those who were invited , when he noticed how they chose the best seats , and said to them , ||| Noma Yesus Nkillia riy maka ha rpol niana la ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawan de pa Namkek nana rwaliria gen miaka kden la gaini . La ' hade pede Yesus Nwatutga ir honona ,
When you are invited by anyone to a wedding feast , do n't sit in the best seat , since perhaps someone more honorable than you might be invited by him , ||| Niwra , La'pa rpolu-rwak miy pia mlia ' a mak kawok mehlima , de yana mtiota liwangeni-mtatangenia samomuounu nanpena mimtatan la . Yoma yanpa e rpol niana-rwak nan walia riy maka orkotkota-ornanana mak karehi wialia miy .
and he who invited both of you would come and tell you , ‘ Make room for this person . ' Then you would begin , with shame , to take the lowest place . ||| De hota nhi'nande ora kniari maka kpol niana-kwak nana mimrio ' de hota nleretniekla nma nakot la o ' a niwra , Yan muwenna yoma gen miaka ha mumtatan la de matromni ed olek la wa . Pa narieiniande hota ommuola-mmua ' nohora mpuatitin genmu la rira to'orni la ' kokio'oni delloo !
But when you are invited , go and sit in the lowest place , so that when he who invited you comes , he may tell you , ‘ Friend , move up higher . ' Then you will be honored in the presence of all who sit at the table with you . ||| Mere samomuounu de , la'pa riy rpolu-rwak nan miy de mlia ' mimtatan la kokio'oni totpena pen neka orroma nma nakot tiy o niwra , Harya , mmuai mpuatitin la ' a gen miakden la gaini . La ' hade nanpena riy honona rta'wa rer miatni la miy yoma rma rwak pa mlia mimtatan la gaigaini .
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled , and whoever humbles himself will be exalted . ||| Yoma la ' he ' to ' a maka kran inonni pa katulu , de hota Uplerlawna Nalerun la yawa . Mere la'pa riy maka kalernia inon wamueheni de hota nawniatniara .
He also said to the one who had invited him , When you make a dinner or a supper , do n't call your friends , nor your brothers , nor your kinsmen , nor rich neighbors , or perhaps they might also return the favor , and pay you back . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la orroma Niwra , La'pa ompuolu-mpuak nana riy totpena rma ra'ana melmela onde lelera , de yana mpuolu-mpuaka tupualmu-lawalmu onde inmu-narmu onde rom heiwialmu mak kre ' a-ktaru , yanhi'pa hota ir mana rpolu-rwak walia o ' a , pa hota la ' hade de , o ' ed maka klernan wniahlani .
But when you make a feast , ask the poor , the maimed , the lame , or the blind , ||| Mere la'pa miwra mhi ' a ya'ana-yemnu la ' a mutliawna , de mpuolu-mpuaka riy maka kakleha-kaplara , maka limni-lakni kalmati , mak ktu ' u-kwaini me riy maka matni edon kamkeka .
and you will be blessed , because they do n't have the resources to repay you . For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous . ||| Ne hota omliernan pripanni-fa'anni . Yoma riy maka ompuolu-mpuak pa ka'ana-kemnia oleka re taken niana rwoili-rwahla o nhiolmu-lietmu re . Mere hota o kalwiedmu de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu orgahani ed maka kwahla hare honona la ' a lerni maka riy mak kaplola la Uplerlawna yamkekni rmori owa'ana .
When one of those who sat at the table with him heard these things , he said to him , Blessed is he who will feast in God 's Kingdom ! ||| La'pa riy mak ka'an rereri ida natlin reria Yesus Nakot emkare , noma nakot la Yesus niwra , La'pa hameni ed maka hota kor rewre'wa Uplerlawna pa ra'an wutu la ' Uplerlawna geni maka Entorna-nrautu , de hota ha nlernana unut lawna !
But he said to him , A certain man made a great supper , and he invited many people . ||| Mere Yesus Nnairia yawalliohor id pa Nwahla riy de Niwra , La lera ida , de riy ida nhi ' a ya'ana-yemnu lawna pa npolu-nwak rira riwnu-halli pa rma ra'ana-remnu .
He sent out his servant at supper time to tell those who were invited , ‘ Come , for everything is ready now . ' ||| La'pa nte'ela lerni-melli pa riwra ra'an wa de hota ora kniar die nhopan pa mak ktulla kniari nla npolg awoka mak ha rpol niana-rwak nana re pa rma ra'an wa yoma wra ' u rahnioi olekwa .
They all as one began to make excuses . The first said to him , ‘ I have bought a field , and I must go and see it . Please have me excused . ' ||| Mere hota mak ha rpolu-rwaka re honona nekpa riwra ora kniari yan nawenna . Riy id niwra na'nama ira rawel niana tani anna oke ' a pa e rla rhi ' nohora , pa yan miwenna me hota ami edonna mtiy .
Another said , ‘ I have bought five yoke of oxen , and I must go try them out . Please have me excused . ' ||| Ne dom pal die riwra , Hota ami edonna mtiy yoma na'nama ami e mawel niana hayori termida pa ami e miwra mamkeka pa mta ' tieka .
Another said , ‘ I have married a wife , and therefore I ca n't come . ' ||| Ne la ' dom pal die riwra , Yana miwenna hota ami edonna mtiy lia ler di yoma ami e mhi ' nohora a mehli'mu .
That servant came , and told his lord these things . Then the master of the house , being angry , said to his servant , ‘ Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city , and bring in the poor , maimed , blind , and lame . ' ||| Noma mak kla kpol die nla ' pa nakot la tunni , la ' a lir maka ha rakotkota re . Ora kniar die nawenan doin la , ne nhopan pa mak kar lia de plet pa nla npolu la ' riy meni to ' maka kwehwet lia loi liawna-talan lawna , me talla mak kden la rom lawna rletni-rletni la ' a letlawan de totpena mak kakleha-kaplara re honona re rmai rewre'wa wut lia maka limni-lakni kalmati , me mak ktu ' u-kwaini , mak edonna kamkeka re pa ra'ana-remunia handi .
The servant said , ‘ Lord , it is done as you commanded , and there is still room . ' ||| Nla npolga pa honona rmai wia , noma nla nakot la tunni de niwra , Tuna , maka a lia puolu re honona e ramtatn oleka wa , mere geni e rahgali liawanni ma'ta .
The lord said to the servant , ‘ Go out into the highways and hedges , and compel them to come in , that my house may be filled . ||| Noma tunni de niwra , Mlia ' pa mliola loi liawna-talan lawna , me mliol wal lia loi-talla kuke ' a re la ' a leta to'orni , pa mlioh momuoga uhunu-ewatni ne mtieka kuku'uni-lalawanni re rma rapenga a ro'mu di .
For I tell you that none of those men who were invited will taste of my supper . For many are called , but few are chosen . ' ||| Ne mhuoratreria , riy maka ha rpol ulga re id mana hota edonna nma natniapal la mai handi pa nora ra'an rewre'wa la ' mei di wawannu .
Now great multitudes were going with him . He turned and said to them , ||| Rira liawanni ror Yesus rala ' wutu . Noma Yesus Nkillia pa Nakot la re Niwra ,
If anyone comes to me , and does n't disregard his own father , mother , wife , children , brothers , and sisters , yes , and his own life also , he ca n't be my disciple . ||| La'pa riy riwra rlernohora A ' u , mere rhoratreria inni-amni , hawni-a'nani , inni-narni , onde la'pa inon wamueheni pa nareh dioini A ' u , ho'mana hota taken niana rma tieman mai A ' u .
Whoever does n't bear his own cross and come after me , ca n't be my disciple . ||| Riy mak edonna kre'ela pa kor wut A ' pua nler la yamuki-yama'ala onde matmiati pa emolmolan nekama nhoi wawayanni la auwlakra pa nlernohor A ' u , de hota edonna nler teman la mak klernohor reri A ' u .
For which of you , desiring to build a tower , does n't first sit down and count the cost , to see if he has enough to complete it ? ||| La'pa riy id tiy miy niwra nariria roma tutul liawna ida de nhi'inde nhor nrekan ulga e kupanni mak hota ha nalgota pa na naweli-nala ' a hare honona , totpena nat niohor oleka hota kupna ntu'tu pa nhi ' a kniar die me edonna .
Or perhaps , when he has laid a foundation and is n't able to finish , everyone who sees begins to mock him , ||| Yoma hota kupna edon ntu'tu pa nariria rom tutulu , mere rom tutul die watu liar pianullu rkari oleka wa , de hota riy ramkek la de ramalia .
saying , ‘ This man began to build and was n't able to finish . ' ||| Hota riy riwra , Mkil tio'ola hade , niwra nariri likti mere takeni nhi ' nana .
Or what king , as he goes to encounter another king in war , will not sit down first and consider whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand ? ||| La'pa ray ida kekni-rautnu riy riwnu termida ne niwra nora ray miaka kekni-rautnu riwnu terampworu ra'ara , de pa'etnu pa ray die nwarekna rurni-laini maka hota nnairia la ar ralma de hota naruri-nalai pia nal arwalli la ' yawa me edonna ?
Or else , while the other is yet a great way off , he sends an envoy and asks for conditions of peace . ||| La'pa natga de hota nakleh ruri , de hota nala ' ul pua nhopna rla rakot la arwalli de pa rkalwied nek wa .
So therefore , whoever of you who does n't renounce all that he has , he ca n't be my disciple . ||| Ne hota emkade wal tiy miy , mimpiaror pleini miy rurmi-laimi . Yoma ta'en niana riy id tiy miy nlernohora A ' u , la'pa nhoratreria inni-amni , hawni-a'nani , inni-narni la'pa inon wamueheni nora hare honona maka ralamni nod rer lia de . Mere mhioratdoin hare honona totpena mliernohor A ' u .
Salt is good , but if the salt becomes flat and tasteless , with what do you season it ? ||| Kio ' a de plola pa samoga , mere la'pa edonna nmahana , de ta'en niana ra'itr owa'ana ha mahanni toh ? !
It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile . It is thrown out . He who has ears to hear , let him hear . ||| Hota nakleha perkun wa . Yoma nakleh perkun la ' a nhyi ' a , me rhi ' a la tan mi'na pa ra rapoti-rakadwua yawuli-yatniamni ho'mana taken nian wa . La ' hade pa rhoplial neka wa . La'pa miy tlinmi erla , de mitlin reri !
Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming close to him to hear him . ||| La ' lera ida ne , mak kawoka blastena rirahu me maka ha riwra mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala rmai momuou pua ratlina Yesus Nwatutu-nwaye ' a .
The Pharisees and the scribes murmured , saying , This man welcomes sinners , and eats with them . ||| Noma riy Parisi rora tungkurga agama re kunkunu-kekehena pa riwra , Ah ! Riy de Nreinian neka riy yatyata-halala , ne Nor wut walia re pa ra'ana-remun wutu !
He told them this parable , ||| La ' hade pede Yesus Nakot nohora yawalliohor dilla ira ,
Which of you men , if you had one hundred sheep and lost one of them , would n't leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness and go after the one that was lost , until he found it ? ||| Yawalliohor id di tiy miy wia . La ' riy id tiy miy de hanni pipdiuma rahu ida . Noma plin-plinnianama ida nmolu me . De hota riy de nhi ' emkameni ? Nahmenmen nana , nteman targa pipdiumni terampwosiewa wehrani wosiewa re rwahak pa ra'an la wewan mou wawannu , ne nla nahak memna dum memeh mak kmol die pa nlernana .
When he has found it , he carries it on his shoulders , rejoicing . ||| Ne la'pa nlernana , de hota nahepur nohora pa nmai die nakwar nana .
When he comes home , he calls together his friends and his neighbors , saying to them , ‘ Rejoice with me , for I have found my sheep which was lost ! ' ||| Nmai na'nama npolga mutwualli re rora rom heiwialli re pa nakot la re , A ' g e uhepur nohora pipdiuma maka aliernan olek di , mai pia tamuki-tahepur nohora .
I tell you that even so there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents , than over ninety-nine righteous people who need no repentance . ||| Mimpiesiayo , emkade walia Uplerlawna Nora hopopanni-lili'irnu la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha hota ramuki-rahepru nohora riy ida , yoma riy de nhoitio'or doin oleka la ' a do'oni-halli . Uplerlawna yaheparnu onnila riy de , nareh dioinia yaheparnu la riy terampwosiewa wehrani wosiew mak edon rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioini do'oni-halli yoma rden olek la plol wawna .
Or what woman , if she had ten drachma coins , if she lost one drachma coin , would n't light a lamp , sweep the house , and seek diligently until she found it ? ||| Yawalliohora id owa'ana la patke ' a ida nhi ' targa kupna-kai la ' lera termida gahani , noma lera ida kupna id nmolu . Noma hota pat de nhi ' emkameni ? Hota ntutin wa'du ne nhera-nhapua romni nayanni na'nama nwahak la ' a-maiya kupan de totpena nlernan memna .
When she has found it , she calls together her friends and neighbors , saying , ‘ Rejoice with me , for I have found the drachma which I had lost ! ' ||| Pa la'pa nlernana kupan de , de hota npolga la mutwualli rora rom heiwialli re pa nakot la re , A ' g e uhepur nohora a kupnu maka aliernan olek di , mai pia tamuki-tahepur nohora .
Even so , I tell you , there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner repenting . ||| Hota emkade wal lia Uplerlawna Nora hopopanni-lili'irnu ramuki-rahepur nohora riy yatyata-halal ida nhoitio'or doini do'oni-halli . Mpiesiaya lir di !
He said , A certain man had two sons . ||| Yesus Nakot owa'an lirni Niwra , Muanke ' a ida a'nani muanke ' a woru .
The younger of them said to his father , ‘ Father , give me my share of your property . ' So he divided his livelihood between them . ||| Noma gari nakot la amni niwra , Ama , mhuakar pa muala it re'eni-tniarnu re dom mai a ' u . Noma amni nhakra re'eni-tniarnu re la ' a a'nani rora .
Not many days after , the younger son gathered all of this together and traveled into a far country . There he wasted his property with riotous living . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne a'nani gari nal doin momuoga nhiakarni pa nla nhopla-nlar la olietlet wa . Nla'awa pa nkalge'era kupna-kaini re la ' a patke ' yata me la ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi yatyata-halala dom pali .
When he had spent all of it , there arose a severe famine in that country , and he began to be in need . ||| La'pa nhor momuou dewade nhortiut niana rehka-lar lawna nwewar wal lia noha wawannu pa narieiniande naniki-nalai wia .
He went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country , and he sent him into his fields to feed pigs . ||| Pede nla ' nwak pa nkar lia ' a riy ornoh ida . Noma ornoh de nhopan pa la nwa'an waw lia ' a nhyi'-tlunni ralamni .
He wanted to fill his belly with the pods that the pigs ate , but no one gave him any . ||| La'pa naplar rehia , noma niwra na'an meman wawi re yamananni , mere riy edon rala hadomdom pa na'ana-nemnu .
But when he came to himself , he said , ‘ How many hired servants of my father 's have bread enough to spare , and I 'm dying with hunger ! ||| La'awa hohoni dewade nhioratni nla'awa temni pa niwra , Eh ! La ' a ro'mu de rirahu e rkar lia a a'mu onni , me e rtikil wutu-rhal wutga ya'ana-yemnu la ' lelera-melmela , ne hya ' ed mak khi ' a a ' pua trema-trema amuat lia lara ? !
I will get up and go to my father , and will tell him , Father , I have sinned against heaven and in your sight . ||| A'uwal niek la a a'mu onni wa . Ne pena awuaka lilili-mamuau lia e ' a . Yoma aghal olek la Uplerlawna Nora a'mu e ' a .
I am no more worthy to be called your son . Make me as one of your hired servants . ' ||| Yana npol a lia a'nani , mere nhi ' a lia mak kar lia e ' a . Nwaror emkade pa nhorwua
He arose and came to his father . But while he was still far off , his father saw him and was moved with compassion , and ran , fell on his neck , and kissed him . ||| noma nadil doin la pa nawal lia amni de . Mere la'pa oliet ma'ta de , amni namkek nan oleka wa . Amni ralamni nmolu-nhelam nohora pa nawlar pia nwatroma na'nama nkolla pa nkinnia .
The son said to him , ‘ Father , I have sinned against heaven and in your sight . I am no longer worthy to be called your son . ' ||| Noma nakot la amni niwra , Ama , aghi ' oleka do ' a-hal la omuora Uplerlawna . Yana mpuol a lia o a'namu .
But the father said to his servants , ‘ Bring out the best robe and put it on him . Put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet . ||| Mere amni edonna natlin la a'nani de lirni ne npol lia mak ktulla-kar lia hande pa niwra , Pleta ! Mlia mtie'la nana pola-rainia samomuou pa miodi mmiai totpena ha nnairia . Miohu kdieli la okarni me mhioin lakni wniowni .
Bring the fattened calf , kill it , and let 's eat and celebrate , ||| Nhor nianpena mlia mriotna hayori a'na maka inonni kapetpetan de totpena ita'ana-temun nohora ha maimiaini de , ne tamuki-tahepru .
for this , my son , was dead and is alive again . He was lost and is found . ' Then they began to celebrate . ||| Yoma a a'nu di de emeknekama ha nmati olekwa mere nmori owa'an , me riwra ha nmolg olekwa mere tlernan owa'ana ! Dewade honona re rlernohora E lirni pa ramuki-rahepur nohora .
Now his elder son was in the field . As he came near to the house , he heard music and dancing . ||| La'pa ertepartarlia yamuki-yahepru , mere kakni ed hala la ' a nhyi ' ralma . La'pa kakni de nmai wia ne natlin de tiwla-prai yetni-warna me nhieka lelana nmori .
He called one of the servants to him and asked what was going on . ||| Pede npolga mak ktulla-kari re id pa natiana niwra , E rhi ' a hya ' a la ' roma nayanni ?
He said to him , ‘ Your brother has come , and your father has killed the fattened calf , because he has received him back safe and healthy . ' ||| Noma mak ha natian de nwalolla niwra , Tuna garni e nawali olekwa ! Ne tuna amni nhopan pa rwen oleka hayori a'na pepetan lawna id pa ra'ana yoma tuna garni de nawali owa'an pa nmai die nkalwiedweda !
But he was angry and would not go in . Therefore his father came out and begged him . ||| Dewade kakni nawenan pa naya'ala pa edonna nwakriania roma onni . Noma amni nleretniekla nla noh lili-noh mauga pa nodia la rialma .
But he answered his father , ‘ Behold , these many years I have served you , and I never disobeyed a commandment of yours , but you never gave me a goat , that I might celebrate with my friends . ||| Mere nakot la amni niwra , La ' anni-anin de a ' g e ukdieha-uktiahli nohora kniari emekto'ama hopopna-lili'iru ga umkek to ' ama ! Ne a ' g edonna ugai pietan tar tiy o ' ama . Ne yawar pa omhi ' emkade mai a ' u ? La'pa pipi a'na ku ' id mana o edonna muala pa agora a tupwa'lu-lawa'lu re mahepur nohora ya'anni-yemannu .
But when this your son came , who has devoured your living with prostitutes , you killed the fattened calf for him . ' ||| Mere a'namu de nkalgar doinia kupanmu-kaimu la ' a patke ' yatyata , ne la'pa nmai wia noma muakokan nohora wnienna hayori a'na pepetan lawan de pa mhi ' nohora !
He said to him , ‘ Son , you are always with me , and all that is mine is yours . ||| Noma amni nakot la niwra , Amee ! Hyalmu hade ee ! Kakni o ' de nhi'inde omdien rer lia a o'nu , ne hya ' maka a gah ' u de o gahamu hare ee !
But it was appropriate to celebrate and be glad , for this , your brother , was dead , and is alive again . He was lost , and is found . ' ||| Mere mai pia tahepuepur nohora garmu yoma emekneka riy mati oleka hade wa , mere ne ! E nmormiori , me emek mak kmolg olekwa mere ee ! E nawali owa'an pa nma nora ita twatrom owa'ana !
He also said to his disciples , There was a certain rich man who had a manager . An accusation was made to him that this man was wasting his possessions . ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora pa Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , La ' mak kre ' a-ktaru ida nnairia riy id pa nhima-nre ' a la ' a e re'eni-tniarnu . Noma mak ktar die nlernana nur lia rira de riwra , Eh , Mak khima-kre ' de para ' a la kupna-kai .
He called him , and said to him , ‘ What is this that I hear about you ? Give an accounting of your management , for you can no longer be manager . ' ||| Pede npolga mak kar die pa nakot la niwra , A ' g utlina o ' de maka para ' a kupna-kai id o ' a . La ' dodo'ondi de mual momuou tieka puk otna-ara re pa a'umkek teka ! Hota dodo'ondi de ompuair wa la ' a o kniarmu la ' a a re ' u-tnia'ru re .
The manager said within himself , ‘ What will I do , seeing that my lord is taking away the management position from me ? I do n't have strength to dig . I am ashamed to beg . ||| Dewade mak kar lia kupna genni de nla'awa , noma wniarorni naplahwa pa niwra , Hota dodo'ondi de aghi ' a hya ' o ? Hota la dodo'ondi de a tu'nu de nwaliernia a lia knia'ru . La'pa wnial tiani mana a'ukleh oleka rur wia . La'pa aghi ' a mak kmeh ' a kawakwaka ho'mana amuola-mua ' a .
I know what I will do , so that when I am removed from management , they may receive me into their houses . ' ||| Aniair teka akal ida totpa la'pa rwalernia a lia a knia'ru , de hota rirahu edonna rwayotlia a lia ' a ir romni nayanni .
Calling each one of his lord 's debtors to him , he said to the first , ‘ How much do you owe to my lord ? ' ||| Noma mak kar lia kupna genni de npolga riy honona maka khi ' otna-ar la ' a e tunni de . Noma nakot la riy mak kala ' ulu niwra , O otanmu wo'ir la ' a a tu'nu ?
He said , ‘ A hundred batos of oil . ' He said to him , ‘ Take your bill , and sit down quickly and write fifty . ' ||| Noma riy de nwalolla niwra , A otnu wu'ru nora kuhi rahu ida . Noma mak kar die nakot la maka otan de niwra , Muala pukmu di pa ple'etu pa mumtatnu pa mhuorat la pukmu de otanmu de wu'ru nora kuhi terampwolima .
Then he said to another , ‘ How much do you owe ? ' He said , ‘ A hundred cors of wheat . ' He said to him , ‘ Take your bill , and write eighty . ' ||| Nhor nioma natian owa'an riy id owa'an niwra , Ne hota o ' de otanmu wo'ir la a tu'nu ? Noma riy de nwalolla niwra , A ha'nu de metma wetra ' lawna kadu riwnu ida . Noma mak kar lia kupna genni de nakot la niwra , Muala pukmu di pa mhuorta otanmu de wetra ' lawna kadu rahu wo'awa .
His lord commended the dishonest manager because he had done wisely , for the children of this world are , in their own generation , wiser than the children of the light . ||| Dewade nhi ' emkade owa'an la wotellu-wogatni . Noma mak kre ' a-ktar die na'uli-nawedia mak khima-kre ' a e re'eni-tniarnu mak knair pudi-akal de yoma la ' a e wniarorni mak emkade pede nlernana rira ralam kalwiedni pa hota rtulan la e ' a . Noma Yesus Nakot owa'an lirni la mak katlina re niwra , Agala yawalliohor di tiy miy , yoma rimormiori mak edon kpesiaya natu nahak talan pa nlernan untu la ir rimormior wialli pa narehelia rimormior miaka kmori-kdar lia ' lelerni .
I tell you , make for yourselves friends by means of unrighteous mammon , so that when you fail , they may receive you into the eternal tents . ||| Pa hota mitlina ! Hota miy miana mniairi nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu pa mtiulan la rimormior wialmi pa ma mpiahaka totpa riy rahu rtelan nana-raut nan miy , totpa la'pa nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu nhorwua ne mmiati olek wa , de hota ral ralamni tetema pa rreiniana-ra'nan miy lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
He who is faithful in a very little is faithful also in much . He who is dishonest in a very little is also dishonest in much . ||| Mhioratreria ! Riy maka ha rpesiay oleka la ha kuku ' id to ' a , de hota rpesiay wialia la ha lalawna . Mere la'pa riy maka edonna rpesiaya la ha kuku ' ida , de hota edonna rpesiay wiali la ha lalawna .
If therefore you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon , who will commit to your trust the true riches ? ||| La'pa ta'en nian rpesiay miy lia re ' a-tniar nohkerna wawannu de ta'eni rpesiay wiali miy lia re ' a-tniaru la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
If you have not been faithful in that which is another 's , who will give you that which is your own ? ||| La'pa ta'en niana rpesiay miy lia ' a yohya ' a maka riy dom to ' gahani de , de hota he ' gaga'anu pa nala miy yohya ' gah wamuehemi rena ? !
No servant can serve two masters , for either he will hate the one and love the other , or else he will hold to one and despise the other . You are n't able to serve God and Mammon . ||| Nhi'inde riy ida ta'en niana natlin la matromni riy woru . Yoma hota natlin samomuou lia ida ne la handina de edonna natlin kalwiedwed la . Emkade walia la miy . Hota ta'en niana mimpiaror to ' neka re ' a-tniar nohkerna gahani me mial walia ihrami tetema pa mhima-mrie ' a Uplerlawna kniarni .
The Pharisees , who were lovers of money , also heard all these things , and they scoffed at him . ||| Riy Parisi re ratlina momuoga lira-tun muaka Yesus ha nakota re . Noma ramalia Yesus yoma ralamni re rod rer lia kupna-kai .
He said to them , You are those who justify yourselves in the sight of men , but God knows your hearts . For that which is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Miy di de mtiut inonmi la riy yamkekni pa emeknekama riy plollol miy . Mere la ' a Uplerlawna matni de Enamkek eti-lahwa miy pa Nat niohora ihrami ralamni yatyatni re mak kod rer niek la kupna . Ne la ' a hya ' maka rimormior nhi'inde rahakhaka de hota ha yatyat hade la Uplerlawna matni yamkekni .
The law and the prophets were until John . From that time the Good News of God 's Kingdom is preached , and everyone is forcing his way into it . ||| Deulu-tatra maka Musa ha nala me wniatutu-wniaye ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu de e rwatutu la la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la Yohansi makharani lerni . Nwaga mulaliaini la ' Yohansi lerni de Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak rakot nohora Uplerlawna hota Ntorna-nraut de emekwalima Ray ida nwewar la noha pa nodi liarni . Ne rirahu rwaleran totpa rler wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu .
But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one tiny stroke of a pen in the law to fall . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni ndella pa nodia liarni . La'pa nohkerna nora lyanti rmadger de me hota lera edonna npahna nana , mere hurpu nora titikni id mana maka Uplerlawna Nhorat targa la deullu-tatarni hota edon rwun dioin meman wa .
Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery . He who marries one who is divorced from a husband commits adultery . ||| La'pa he ' ed maka kpera-kdaitia deulu-tatra pa nhopliala hawni patke ' a ne nla nora patke ' a id owa'an rmehlima , de emeknekama nalira-naliai lia Uplerlawna yamkekni . Ne la ' walia riy maka kmehlimpa kora patke ' a maka kpaletan nohora muanke'eni de nhi ' wali yalira-yaliai lia Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Now there was a certain rich man , and he was clothed in purple and fine linen , living in luxury every day . ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora id owa'an pa Niwra , La ' a makre ' a-maktaru ida , de nnairia hewewta-naniairia mak welli werwerta . Enre ' a-ntar pua na'an lawna-nemun lawna la'pa nmor niohora yohya ' hya ' to ' a mak samomuou honona la lera-lera .
A certain beggar , named Lazarus , was taken to his gate , full of sores , ||| La ' a romni nhiarni gaini , de rwatat tiarga riy mak kakleha-kaplara ida , de nanni Lasarus . La ' inonni tetema de penpuen lia keri-ga'ara .
and desiring to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man 's table . Yes , even the dogs came and licked his sores . ||| Lasarus nakleha-naplar meman pa nwakwak meman pa na'ana yamanan lu'wu mak kuru-karga la mak ktar die meini nayanni . Ne edon emkade to ' a mere ahu-ahu re mana lera-ler nekpa rma rrama Lasarus kerni-ga'arni mak kalui-kawdia ' i de !
The beggar died , and he was carried away by the angels to Abraham 's bosom . The rich man also died and was buried . ||| Noma edonna nalo'on wali ne mak kakleha-kaplar de nmat wia , pa Uplerlawna hopopanni rma ra'ala , pa rodia la gen samomuou mak kden la Abrahama onni , la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Ne riy mak kre ' a-ktar die mana nmat wiali noma rtamnia .
In Hades , he lifted up his eyes , being in torment , and saw Abraham far off , and Lazarus at his bosom . ||| Pede nhiwni pepe'etu-papatla la ai mormiori ralamni naraka pa polpuol inni-wakwak amni . Ne la'pa namkek nan tutga Abrahama la ' heyanan delloo , de matni nki'ir nan walia Lasarus e nor rewre'wa Abrahama la ' hande .
He cried and said , ‘ Father Abraham , have mercy on me , and send Lazarus , that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue ! For I am in anguish in this flame . ' ||| Noma nhaun la niwra , Am Abraham ee ! Mtiulla-msiayn nan a ' g ee ! Mukot la Lasarus pa nto ' okarni la gera pa nodi nmai pia na nawe'er nan to ' a a na'mu tutnu . Yoma a ta'eni tiahan nana ai di pahnani oo !
But Abraham said , ‘ Son , remember that you , in your lifetime , received your good things , and Lazarus , in the same way , bad things . But here he is now comforted and you are in anguish . ||| Mere Abrahama nakot la niwra , Amee ! Takot pa ! Mhioratreria , la'pa omdien ma'ta la nohkerna wawannu de omtieman nana mak samomuou honona mere Lasarus di de nakwara kleha-lara , mehra-mau , lui-nuhru . Mere ama , mkil tio'ola la ' dodo'ondi , de Lasarus ralamni namtiertiernu yoma hota edon nlernan owa'ana mehra-mau lului-nurnuhru . Ne o ' de mu'uhi-muklel la genmu la ' hande .
Besides all this , between us and you there is a great gulf fixed , that those who want to pass from here to you are not able , and that no one may cross over from there to us . ' ||| La ' walia la ' omuor am die de e rhi ' targ oleka hu'ul matmiat liawna ida maka ta'en nian itlola . Pede miy edon mmiai , me am miana edonna mtiy miy die wa .
He said , ‘ I ask you therefore , father , that you would send him to my father 's house- ||| Noma mak ktar die nakot la niwra , Emkade de , ama , awuak lilili-mamuau tiy o ' a totpena mtiulan pa mhuopna Lasarus nla a a'mu la roma nayanni .
for I have five brothers-that he may testify to them , so they wo n't also come into this place of torment . ' ||| Yoma tre ' ma'ta a hya'lu riy wolima . Mhuopan pa Lasarus nla nwagahniorta re pa yan rlernohora a nhio'lu-lie'tu pa rma rlernan walia gen miaka ai mormiori pahnani . Gen di de ta'en niana it tahan nana .
But Abraham said to him , ‘ They have Moses and the prophets . Let them listen to them . ' ||| Noma Abrahama nakot la niwra , Ama , mak kwarini re rtorreri oleka Musa pukni , me makwohorulu-ktatrulu pukni walia . Ndella pa rlernohor neka puka re lirni .
He said , ‘ No , father Abraham , but if one goes to them from the dead , they will repent . ' ||| Mere riy mak kre ' a-ktar die nwaklir la Abrahama niwra , Hota hade edonna ntu'tu ma'ta am ee ! Mere la'pa riy mak kmati ida nmori owa'an pa nodia lir la ira de hota rpesiaya rpa rhoitio'or doinia do'oni-halli re honona .
He said to him , ‘ If they do n't listen to Moses and the prophets , neither will they be persuaded if one rises from the dead . ' ||| Noma Abrahama nakot la niwra , La'pa ir edonna ratlin la Musa deullu-tatarni lira nnio'oni-wawa niatnu , me makwohorulu-ktatrulu re lirni-tunnu , de hota la'pa riy ida nmori owa'an la matmiati ralamni pa nma nodia kot la ira , de hota ir mana edonna rpesiay wial lia .
He said to the disciples , It is impossible that no occasions of stumbling should come , but woe to him through whom they come ! ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Totota-wudwiudi , yapi ' u-yaga ' u mak kodi riy lia do ' a-hala ralamni er olekwa . Mere he ' mak knairia hare pa ktota riy lia do ' a-hala ralamni , riy de ed maka kler la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani .
It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck , and he were thrown into the sea , rather than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble . ||| Samomuounu de rkohg wutga watu werwerta id la e tiernu totpa ntepar wenna la hletan lawna ! Yoma hota nmormior die pa narieiniande makpesiay id to ' pa nler la do ' a-hala ralamni hota nler la Uplerlawna niukum lawanni .
Be careful . If your brother sins against you , rebuke him . If he repents , forgive him . ||| La ' hade pede nhiorta la ' temmi ! La'pa inmi-narmi e rhi ' a do ' a-hala , de mpiolliohora . La'pa rhoitio'or doin do'oni-halli de , de hota miy edonna mtio'on reria .
If he sins against you seven times in the day , and seven times returns , saying , ‘ I repent , ' you shall forgive him . ||| Ne la'pa la ' lera id ho'mana , riy ida e nhi ' nan do ' a-hala re'eni wo'itu tiy miy , de hota mhiur niohora pa mhioratdoinia e do'oni-halli re , yoma e nmaimiai rer pia nwak lilili-mamuau maaf tiy miy .
The apostles said to the Lord , Increase our faith . ||| Noma riy maka Yesus Nhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re rakot la Yesus riwra , Matroma , Mhi ' aruria a pesiay mamni .
The Lord said , If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed , you would tell this sycamore tree , ‘ Be uprooted and be planted in the sea , ' and it would obey you . ||| Noma Itmatromni Nakot la re Niwra , La'pa miy pesiaymi inponni emeknekama sasawi ola ida de hota mhiopan pa nu'nu on lawna ida mak kdella keranni de pa la nawniau lia tah ' i lawna , de hota nlernohora .
But who is there among you , having a servant plowing or keeping sheep , that will say when he comes in from the field , ‘ Come immediately and sit down at the table ' ? ||| Yesus lirni , La'pa miy die mhiopna hopopanmi pa nwal tian lia nhyi ' ralma onde nhi ' makodi nhiuri-wnia'ana . La'pa ntulla-nkar pia nawal wia , de hota mikot hya ' lir la mak ktulla-kar dieno ? Hota miy edonna miwra , Plet pa ma mu'una .
Would n't he rather tell him , ‘ Prepare my supper , clothe yourself properly , and serve me while I eat and drink . Afterward you shall eat and drink ' ? ||| Mere hota miwra , Ple'etu pa mlia ' mpipara , dewade mupola-murainia kalwiedwe'du pa mua mhuoi wra ' u pa a'una , pa nhor nianpena mu'una .
Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded ? I think not . ||| Hopopan de edonna nlernana ya'uli yoma natu nhu'ru-nhelam , natlina-natailla tunni de !
Even so you also , when you have done all the things that are commanded you , say , ‘ We are unworthy servants . We have done our duty . ' ||| Emkade wali miora Uplerlawna . La ' mimliernohora hare honona maka Uplerlawna Nhopan pa mhi ' a , de mikot neka miwra , Am di de hopopna-lili'iru to ' ami pa amlernohora hya ' maka ha rhopan pa amkari .
As he was on his way to Jerusalem , he was passing along the borders of Samaria and Galilee . ||| La ' a yala ' a plahwani pa nokria Yerusalem de Yesus Nlola Samaria nora Galilea mneheni .
As he entered into a certain village , ten men who were lepers met him , who stood at a distance . ||| La'pa rler la leta id wa dewade riy maka kanienia ulityata-temyata riy termida rmai die rtutrier lia olietlet
They lifted up their voices , saying , Jesus , Master , have mercy on us ! ||| na'nama rhaun pa riwra , Yesus Matrom ee ! Mtiulla-msiayn nan ami ee !
When he saw them , he said to them , Go and show yourselves to the priests . As they went , they were cleansed . ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek nana re noma Nakot la re Niwra , Mlia ' imam-imam re pa mpiak pa ramkek teka inonmi rena pa emeknekama Musa deullu-tatarni nakot la mak kmou olek la ulityata-temyata ! Dewade honona re rla'awa . Rla ' de , de nnieni-nhiena ulityata re ema rhai dioinia la inonni tetema .
One of them , when he saw that he was healed , turned back , glorifying God with a loud voice . ||| La'pa riy id la ' a riy termida re natga e nkalwied olekwa la ' a nnienni , dewade nawali pia nhaunu pa na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna , de nahepur nohora .
He fell on his face at Jesus ' feet , giving him thanks , and he was a Samaritan . ||| Ne nmai pia nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama na'uli-nawedia . Riy de Yahudi atia ' a e ' a mere mak kden Samaria ida de .
Jesus answered , Were n't the ten cleansed ? But where are the nine ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Riy mak kalwieda re , riy termid miy ! Ne riy wosiew erla meni ?
Were there none found who returned to give glory to God , except this foreigner ? ||| Hya ' a nrei pia eneknek to'ama dakan di nmeh ' a nma nawali owa'an pa nma na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna ? !
Then he said to him , Get up , and go your way . Your faith has healed you . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la riy de Niwra , Muprir pia mlia'awa ! Yoma ompuesiay olek A wua pa mkialwied wa .
Being asked by the Pharisees when God 's Kingdom would come , he answered them , God 's Kingdom does n't come with observation , ||| Lera ida ne riy Parisi doma ratiana Yesus riwra , Hota mowen nianpena Uplerlawna Nmai pia Na'ala kniarni pa emeka mak ktorna-krautu la nohkerna wawannu ? Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , Uplerlawna Na'ala kniarni de edonna Nalharia pa rimormiori matni ramkek nana .
neither will they say , ‘ Look , here ! ' or , ‘ Look , there ! ' for behold , God 's Kingdom is within you . ||| Ne hota riy raplin niohora rwahauria Uplerlawna lodanni-hairni etla handi onde la ' hande . Yoma Uplerlawna tnioranni-riautnu pa emeka Ray , la dodo'ondi ed olek la ' rira ihranu ralamni .
He said to the disciples , The days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man , and you will not see it . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Hota la ' pa nmai wia lerni pa mimpiahak toto ' memna pa mior rewre'wa Rimormior A'na A ' die la ler ho'ke'eni to ' a , mere hota miy edonna mliernana A ' u .
They will tell you , ‘ Look , here ! ' or ‘ Look , there ! ' Do n't go away or follow after them , ||| Ne hota riy riwra , Eee ! Mimkeka la hande onde mimkeka la handi . Rimormiori A'na Nmai oleka dee ! Mere yan memmemna mliergot pa mihaka ha lolola !
for as the lightning , when it flashes out of one part under the sky , shines to another part under the sky , so will the Son of Man be in his day . ||| Yoma hota Rimormiori A'na A maimia'yu , edon emkade . Mere emkameni la nwatlena la lyanti maka ni'it nana lairni la lyanti honi pa nla ntut lia honi de hota riy honona ramkek memna , de hota emkade wal lia Rimormiori A'na A maimia'yu la re'eni wornu .
But first , he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation . ||| Mere Uplerlawna Nror targ oleka pa A'ula ' ul pua Alier nek la kropanni-krieutnu , nniahora-nniala ' a , yamuki-yama'ala me hota riy la ' tuwu di de hota rwayotli A ' u plein nampena la la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lerni Amuai owa'ana .
As it was in the days of Noah , even so it will also be in the days of the Son of Man . ||| La'pa Rimormiori A'na A ' die maimia'yu , de hota la ' ler de rimormiori yehwani emolmolan nekama it upni Nuh tuwnu la ' ler ululu .
They ate , they drank , they married , and they were given in marriage until the day that Noah entered into the ship , and the flood came and destroyed them all . ||| La ' ler de riy edon rwaror nohora Uplerlawna niukamnu mere rtepartarlia ya'ana-yemnu me , rmehlima-rmarya ' a . Emkade nekpa nodi liarni pa la'pa nte ' meman la Nuh nler la aupual liawna batra ralamni , dewade ger wawuau liawna nma nwau dioinia rimormiori re honona .
Likewise , even as it was in the days of Lot , they ate , they drank , they bought , they sold , they planted , they built , ||| Me hota emekwalima la ' a Lota lerni wali . Ler de de riy rtepartarlia ya'ana-yemnu , ya'olu-yala ' a , yanhyi ' a-yatlunni , me rariria roma-lewu .
but in the day that Lot went out from Sodom , it rained fire and sulfur from the sky and destroyed them all . ||| Mere la'pa Lota rlergot la let Sodom , de la ' ler de nekpa ai liali nwatiawu lyanti pa nlomar dodioinia rira honona .
It will be the same way in the day that the Son of Man is revealed . ||| Hota emkade walia la ' a ler maka Rimormiori A'na A ' die maimia'yu pa riy ramkek meman A ' u . La ' ler de riy edon rwaror nohora A maimia'yu mak Agodia watghudi lokarni .
In that day , he who will be on the housetop and his goods in the house , let him not go down to take them away . Let him who is in the field likewise not turn back . ||| Hota la ' ler de de yana miy ralammi nko ' i nana nohkerna gahani . Miy maka kateni anni la likti wawannu , de yana mierun pa mlia mia'ala hyonmi-hyanmi la ' a rommi nayanni . Emkade walia la ' a miy mak kden la nhyi ' ralma de yana miwali owa'an la roma nayanni .
Remember Lot 's wife ! ||| Mhioratreria la ' a wnieyata-wnianiawua maka Lota patke'eni ha nlernan oleka wa yoma ralamni nod rer lia la nohkerna gahani .
Whoever seeks to save his life loses it , but whoever loses his life preserves it . ||| La'pa hameni maka kiwra ktorrer pitpitga nohkeran di hyonni-hyanni , wniarorni-wnialaini , hihi'ini-yapyapni hota edon nler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Mere la'pa riy maka khoratdoin hare honona pa nlernohor reri A ' u de hota nlernan mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
I tell you , in that night there will be two people in one bed . One will be taken and the other will be left . ||| Mpiesiaya , la ' ler maka Amuai owa'an de , la ' mel de de riy woru ranin wut lia ' lewu wawannu , de hota ralewna riy mak klernohor A ' u mere mutwualli de edonna ralewan nana yoma edon npesiay A ' u .
There will be two grinding grain together . One will be taken and the other will be left . ||| Ne la'pa patke ' a worg ertepartarlia wetra ' lawna wniotarni de hota mak klernohor A ' die ralewna , mere rhoitio'or doin mutwualli mak edon klernohora A ' u .
They , answering , asked him , Where , Lord ? He said to them , Where the body is , there the vultures will also be gathered together . ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana Yesus riwra , Maimiaimu de hota ha nayamkek la ' hanmeni ? Noma Yesus Nwahla , Hota emeknekama la'pa mak kmati-kmolu de raniewat la meni-meni , de riy rat niohora yoma ramkek nana iha lakma e ntapoi reria re , pa nahe ' niohora ya'ana , de hota emkade walia la'pa Amuai owa'an de riy honona rat niohor memna .
He also spoke a parable to them that they must always pray and not give up , ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nwahaur nohora yawalliohora id la ' a maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , totpena rsumbain rer lia Uplerlawna . Yana rwarora-rwalai die Uplerlawna edonna Natlin la ir polpuollu-wakwakni yoma E ' edon Nal ma'ta hya ' mak rwaka .
saying , There was a judge in a certain city who did n't fear God and did n't respect man . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La ' leta ida , de mak ktoran reria watghudi ida mak edonna kamta'ata Uplerlawna me edonna nwadana rimormior wialli .
A widow was in that city , and she often came to him , saying , ‘ Defend me from my adversary ! ' ||| La ' hande mana patyata ida maka lera-ler nekpa nla nwak la mak ktoran watghudi die totpena nod nian e la ' a lirni-tunnu . Nakot la mak ktoran watghudi niwra , Mtiulan mai a ' u , yanpa a eria'yu na'ala a hyo'nu-hya'nu .
He would n't for a while , but afterward he said to himself , ‘ Though I neither fear God nor respect man , ||| Mere mak ktoran watghudi die nahmena nreiniana pat de wakwakni . Mere la'awa hohoni noma mak ktoran watghudi nwarora de niwra , A ' g edonna umta'ata Uplerlawna , me riy id mana a ' g edonna wuadana ,
yet because this widow bothers me , I will defend her , or else she will wear me out by her continual coming . ' ||| mere lera-ler nekpa patyat di emeka nmai pia nariei mamainia a ' u . Pa emkadella pa aliernohora , yoma hota a'uhmena mere lera-ler nekpa nma nhi ' a ralmu pa wolwo'la .
The Lord said , Listen to what the unrighteous judge says . ||| Noma Itmatromni Nakot la re Niwra , Mitlina samomuoga mak ktoran watghudi mak edon neti rira lirni-tunnu la talan plollola , lirni enakota hya ' a ?
Wo n't God avenge his chosen ones who are crying out to him day and night , and yet he exercises patience with them ? ||| Nah hota yanpa mimpiarora de Uplerlawna hota edonna Nod niana E upni-a'nani maka Ha Nwalir niana de lirni-tunnu , maka lera-ler nekpa rpolpuolu-rwakwak mamainia la E ' a ? E ' edon Ntot pa Nahe ' niohora ma'ta re . Plol toto ' a Entulan la ' ira !
I tell you that he will avenge them quickly . Nevertheless , when the Son of Man comes , will he find faith on the earth ? ||| Mpiesiaya , hota nleretniekla Nod niana re . Mere la'pa Rimormiori A'na A ' die muai owa'an de , de hota emkameni ? Hota la ' ler de de Awuatrom nana riy mak kha'ar rer aranni mai A ' u me edonna ?
He also spoke this parable to certain people who were convinced of their own righteousness , and who despised all others , ||| Yesus Nakot nohor walia yawalliohora dilla la rira . Maka Ha Nakot nohora de lirni nwau lia ' a riy maka kalernia rimormior wialli , mere orgahi rwarora de la ' ir inon wamueheni de e raplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Two men went up into the temple to pray , one was a Pharisee , and the other was a tax collector . ||| Yesus Niwra , La ' ler ida ne riy woru rla rsumbain la Uplerlawna roma kreini . La ' riy id de riy Parisi me la ' id de riy maka nhi'inde kawoka blastena .
The Pharisee stood and prayed by himself like this , ‘ God , I thank you that I am not like the rest of men , extortionists , unrighteous , adulterers , or even like this tax collector . ||| La ' noma riy Parisi die ntutrier pia nsumbain nohora inon wamueheni . Nsumbain pa niwra , Uplerlawnu ne ! A ' u'uli-uwedi O ' a , yoma a ' di de ematia ' a riy dom maka kamnelu-kamna ' a , mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala onde mak kalira-kaliai . A ' u'uli-uwedi O ' a yoma a ' g edonna emeknekama riy mak kawoka blasten di .
I fast twice a week . I give tithes of all that I get . ' ||| A di de utahan nana lar la re'eni wor lia ' krei id ralamni , ne agal walia a liwtu-odwu kupanni tiy O ' a , de agal nhiakra id la nhiakarni termida sepersepuluh .
But the tax collector , standing far away , would n't even lift up his eyes to heaven , but beat his chest , saying , ‘ God , be merciful to me , a sinner ! ' ||| Mere mak kawoka blasten de ntutrier tio'ola olieta ne taken nian pa nwatniar meman la lyanti . Ne nho ' a-nhaiya ihranu pa niwra , Uplerlawnu nee ! Mtiulla-msiayni a ' u . A ' di de riy mak khi ' do ' a-hala id a ' di !
I tell you , this man went down to his house justified rather than the other , for everyone who exalts himself will be humbled , but he who humbles himself will be exalted . ||| Yesus Nakot la mak katlin reri re Niwra , Mpiesiayo , riy maka kawoka blasten de ed maka Uplerlawna Nreiniana emeka riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni mere riy Parisi die edonna . Yoma la ' riy maka kapo'ona-kalawna inonni , de hota Nalernia la yawa me la'pa riy maka kalernia inonni de hota Nrana la tutullu .
They were also bringing their babies to him , that he might touch them . But when the disciples saw it , they rebuked them . ||| Doma rmai die rodia upni-a'nani la Yesus totpena Nran limni pa na Nhilpai-nmanatga re . La'pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramkeka re noma rawenan la re .
Jesus summoned them , saying , Allow the little children to come to me , and do n't hinder them , for God 's Kingdom belongs to such as these . ||| Mere Yesus Nawoka-nale'ga keke'enku ' a re na'nama Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a mak kden hande Niwra , Miolin doinia keke'enku ' a re pa rmai A die . Yana mpiayotlia re , yoma riy mak edon katulu-kapetna inonni mere plet pa rpesiay pia emeknekama keke'enku ' a re er maka Uplerlawna Nwaliria pa rler teman la riy mak kmormior lia E tnioranni-riautnu ralamni .
Most certainly , I tell you , whoever does n't receive God 's Kingdom like a little child , he will in no way enter into it . ||| Mhioratreria , riy maka edonna kpesiay Uplerlawna pa emeknekama keke'enku ' a rpesiay , de hota edonna rler wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu .
A certain ruler asked him , saying , Good Teacher , what shall I do to inherit eternal life ? ||| Riy id la makla ' o'ta-mat la Yahudi natiana Yesus niwra , Am tungkurga , mak kalwiedweda O ' a ! Hota aghi ' a hya ' totpena aliernana mormiori-dardiaria plalahwa pa nodi liarni ?
Jesus asked him , Why do you call me good ? No one is good , except one , God . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hya ' a nrei piede omhuari lirmu mai A die muiwra A ' di de riy kalwied id A ' u ? Riy honona edonna rkalwieda , eneknek to'ama Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a nanpena Nkalwiedweda .
You know the commandments , ‘ Do n't commit adultery , ' ‘ Do n't murder , ' ‘ Do n't steal , ' ‘ Do n't give false testimony , ' ‘ Honor your father and your mother . ' ||| Ne orgahamu muat niohora Uplerlawna riorni-liaini deullu-tatarni niwra , Yana mulira-muliai , yana mpunu-mpuenna , yana mkiamnelu-mkiamna ' a , yana muod niana riy mak khala , ne muatu mu'unni-mumta'ata inmu-ammu .
He said , I have observed all these things from my youth up . ||| Noma riy de nakot la Yesus niwra , Tuna , maka Mukot taru honona re de aliernohora momuog oleka la ' a adien ma'ta la tuwari-laweru lewatni la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' ler di .
When Jesus heard these things , he said to him , You still lack one thing . Sell all that you have and distribute it to the poor . Then you will have treasure in heaven , then come , follow me . ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin nana hade noma Yesus Nakot la , Id edama pa yana mhuoratdoinia . Hota mu'ol dioin momuoga re'emu-tniarmu pa muala welli kupna-kai la ' a riy mak kakleha-kaplara , a'na ri'ini patyatni , ne hota omliernana re ' a-tniaru la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mhi ' hare honona nanpena ma mliernohor reri A ' u .
But when he heard these things , he became very sad , for he was very rich . ||| Mere la'pa riy de natlin nana lira-tunu re dewade ralamni nmolu-nhelam doin la , yoma re'eni-tniarnu harahu rehia .
Jesus , seeing that he became very sad , said , How hard it is for those who have riches to enter into God 's Kingdom ! ||| Yesus Namkek rer lia riy de dewade Niwra , Riy mak kre ' a-ktaru riwra rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , de rler la yawuhi-yawe'et lawna .
For it is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle 's eye than for a rich man to enter into God 's Kingdom . ||| Yoma riy maka kre ' a-ktaru mak kiwa rre ' teman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak Enodi plolli la emeka Ray , de hota emeknekama hayori lawna niwra nlola nhior lawra hu'ulli , mere taken niana .
Those who heard it said , Then who can be saved ? ||| Riy maka katlin reria Yesus lirni re , riwra , La ' pa mak kre ' a-ktaru re ta'en niana rla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu de hota he ' ed maka klernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de ho ' a ?
But he said , The things which are impossible with men are possible with God . ||| Noma Yesus Nwalolla , Niwra , Ta'en niana rimormiori ramori-ralewna inonni . Mere Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa Namori-nalewna ira .
Peter said , Look , we have left everything and followed you . ||| Noma Petrus nhar lirni pa niwra , Matroma , a honon am di de ami e mto'or momuou lia haneknek wawannu pa ami e mlernohor O ' a !
He said to them , Most certainly I tell you , there is no one who has left house , or wife , or brothers , or parents , or children , for God 's Kingdom 's sake , ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Mpiesiaya ! La'pa riy mak kaltarga romni nor wutga hawni-a'nani , inni-amni , inni-narni yoma nma nhima-nre ' a Uplerlawna kniarni totpena Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la riy harahu mormiorni ,
who will not receive many times more in this time , and in the world to come , eternal life . ||| de hota riy de nlernan memna wniahlani la Uplerlawna la ' lera-mela ri , de narehi-nalawan la ' a hya ' maka ha nal targ oleka , ne hota la ' lera maka kmai die e nlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
He took the twelve aside and said to them , Behold , we are going up to Jerusalem , and all the things that are written through the prophets concerning the Son of Man will be completed . ||| Yesus Nawoka-nale'ga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy termida wehrani woru pa rmeh ' a la ' gen ida na'nama Nakot la Niwra , Mitlina ! La ' dodo'ondi de itsortut niana Yerusalem . Hota tla ' hande , de hya ' maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu ha rhorat taru la ' a Rimormior A'na A ' die , pa hota ntutu-nte'ewa .
For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles , will be mocked , treated shamefully , and spit on . ||| Hota ral A lia riy maka Yahudi atia ' a . Hota rhi ' A lia hamalmialia , rapolu-raliel A ' u , me rakrui lia A ga'yu ralamni .
They will scourge and kill him . On the third day , he will rise again . ||| Hota rliwra-rkaklia A ' u me rwen A ' u , mere la'pa lera wotellu , dewade hota Amuori owa'an la matmiati ralamni .
They understood none of these things . This saying was hidden from them , and they did n't understand the things that were said . ||| Lira re honona de , riy maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re id mana edonna rna'erit nana . Yoma lira re nnia'eratni de emeka ha rawunum targa la ir honona pa raplin niohora hya ' ed maka Yesus Nakota reno ?
As he came near Jericho , a certain blind man sat by the road , begging . ||| La'pa Yesus Nhi ' pa Nte'ela la ' Yeriko , noma Namkek de mak matni kyat ida e namtatna pa nmeh ' a nawakwaka la talla aratni .
Hearing a multitude going by , he asked what this meant . ||| La'pa mak matni kyat de natlin nan de rirahu e rla ' a-rmai , noma natiana re niwra , Miy e mhi ' hya ' a ?
They told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by . ||| Noma maka ha natiana re riwra , Yesus mak kwatiawu Nasaret de ed mak kwehweti .
He cried out , Jesus , you son of David , have mercy on me ! ||| Noma mak matni kyat de nhaun pa niwra , Yesus , Daud upni-a'nani ne ! Mtiulla-msiayn nan a ' g ee !
Those who led the way rebuked him , that he should be quiet , but he cried out all the more , You son of David , have mercy on me ! ||| Dewade riy mak kala ' ulu Yesus pa rden la mak matni kyat de onni rawenan la riwra , Hoi ! Molmuo'lu ! Mere yeher to'ama narur lia nhiaunu pa niwra , Daud upni-a'nani nee ! Mtiulan-msiayn nan a ' g ee !
Standing still , Jesus commanded him to be brought to him . When he had come near , he asked him , ||| Noma Yesus Ntut tiar pua Nakot la riy mak kden hande pa rodia riy mat yat della E ' a . La'pa nmai wia , noma Yesus Natiana Niwra ,
What do you want me to do ? He said , Lord , that I may see again . ||| Hya ' ed maka mpuaka mai A ' u ? Noma mat yat de nakot la Yesus niwra , Matrome , awuak de a'umkeka owa'ana !
Jesus said to him , Receive your sight . Your faith has healed you . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hademkade de mumkek wa . Yoma ompuesiay A ' u pede mkialwied wa !
Immediately he received his sight and followed him , glorifying God . All the people , when they saw it , praised God . ||| La ' a mtatande nekpa matni re raphyar wia , noma riy de nlernohora Yesus . Nalala ' reri de na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna . La'pa rirahu ramkeka hihi ' a-yapyap die dewade honona wal pia ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna la genni-tienni .
He entered and was passing through Jericho . ||| La ' pa Yesus Nte'ela la ' a Yeriko , de edonna Nwarin tiaru , mere Nodi liarni la leta ralamni .
There was a man named Zacchaeus . He was a chief tax collector , and he was rich . ||| La ' a let de de riy id makla ' o'tani la mak kawoka blastena e nre ' a-ntaru . Rpolga nanni de Sakeus .
He was trying to see who Jesus was , and could n't because of the crowd , because he was short . ||| Sakeus de nwahak talan pa namkek memna Yesus herni-gaini . Mere rirahu rehia , ne e lakni pukpukelma la ' riy honona , pa narieiniande edon namkek nan walia Yesus .
He ran on ahead and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him , for he was going to pass that way . ||| Pede nawlar pia nala ' ulga riy honona , me nha'at la kar ona ida hananni maka sapon lawna totpena Yesus kekwal die nlol hande namkek nan Yesus .
When Jesus came to the place , he looked up and saw him , and said to him , Zacchaeus , hurry and come down , for today I must stay at your house . ||| La'pa Yesus Nler la au muaka Sakeus handella hananni de noma Yesus Nwatniar reria Sakeus pa Nakot la , Sakeus ee ! Plet pa muernu ! Yoma hota A ' g e tiy o rommu nayanni la ' ler di pa unin la hande !
He hurried , came down , and received him joyfully . ||| Noma Sakeus nleretniekla nwasiorgerun pa nma nwatroma Yesus de kaniha-kamal niohora yoma hota Yesus Nanin la e romni .
When they saw it , they all murmured , saying , He has gone in to lodge with a man who is a sinner . ||| Rirahu ramkek hade de raltier yata riwra , Cih ! Ha nihya'pa Nla Nora riy maka khi ' do ' a-hala de rla rwatamputu la romni nayanni ? !
Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord , Behold , Lord , half of my goods I give to the poor . If I have wrongfully exacted anything of anyone , I restore four times as much . ||| Mere rla ' noma Sakeus ntutrier niek la romni nayanni pa nakot la Itmatromlawanni Niwra , Matroma hota plollol meman pa a re ' a-tnia'ru korni , de nhiakra id la nhiakra woru setengah , de agiwra gala la mak kakleha-kaplara , ne la ' a riy meni to ' maka nhi'inde agakal nan kupanni re hota apuol owa'an la ralamni re'eni wogat la .
Jesus said to him , Today , salvation has come to this house , because he also is a son of Abraham . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , La ' ler di de omuora rommu mniotni honona mliernana mormiori-lewlewna la ' a Uplerlawna yoma o ' mana mtiutga inonmu la ' ler di pa emeka Abraham duratni-waitni mak kaplola .
For the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost . ||| Ne Rimormiori A'na A ' die muai die mua uhaka totpena ulewna rira mak kto'or doin olek la Uplerlawna emeka pipi-duma mak kawlari olek la matromni , totpena ir do'oni-halli edon rod ir la Uplerlawna niukamnu .
As they heard these things , he went on and told a parable , because he was near Jerusalem , and they supposed that God 's Kingdom would be revealed immediately . ||| La'pa riy e ratlin ma'ta la Yesus wniahaurnu de , dewade Nhaur lirni owa'an pa Nakot nohora yawalliohora ida . Yoma la ' ler de E ' ed olek la ' a Yerusalem onni , pa riy ratniekame hota Uplerlawna Nleretniekla Na'ala kniarni de emeknekama Ray no ' noha wawannu .
He said therefore , A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom and to return . ||| Yesus Nwahaur pa Niwra , La'awa lerni de hota marna ida niwra nla ' a noha olietleta ida totpena hota rrana pa nla ' a ray , nhor nianpena hota nawali .
He called ten servants of his and gave them ten mina coins , and told them , ‘ Conduct business until I come . ' ||| Mere edonna nla ' ma'ta de npolga mak kar lia e ' a riy termida pa nala kupan mina la nenenna re ! Rima-rima rlernan kupan maha de emeknekama riy kupna-kaini lera rahu id gahani . Na'nama nakot la re , Mpiadakna kupna ri pa la'pa amuai owa'ana . Noma nwaran wa .
But his citizens hated him , and sent an envoy after him , saying , ‘ We do n't want this man to reign over us . ' ||| Mere noh de mniotni de sukni atia'ala e ' a . Pede la'pa nwaran wa noma rhopan pa riy rla ' pa rod lir la riwra , Amahmen pa riy di nla ' ray mai ami .
When he had come back again , having received the kingdom , he commanded these servants , to whom he had given the money , to be called to him , that he might know what they had gained by conducting business . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana , maran de nrana pa nla ' ray , nhor nia'nama nawal lia nohoni . Nawal wia dewade npol lia mak ktulla-kar lia e ' a re pa rma rlol gaini totpena e nat niohora ira unatnu la wniadakanni de wo'ir maka irlernan oleka wa .
The first came before him , saying , ‘ Lord , your mina has made ten more minas . ' ||| Dewade mak kala ' ulu nmai pia nakot la niwra , Tuna , kupan mina maka omual de a ' u'itar la re'eni termid wa .
He said to him , ‘ Well done , you good servant ! Because you were found faithful with very little , you shall have authority over ten cities . ' ||| Tunni de niwra , Samog ee ! O ' di de mak kar siamomuou id o ' a . Yoma ha kuku ' ida mere nariei pia apuesiay o ' a . Pede hota agal o ' pa muodi plolli la letlawan termida .
The second came , saying , ‘ Your mina , Lord , has made five minas . ' ||| Noma mak ka'an kai wornu de nmai pia nakot la tunni de niwra , Tuna , kupan mina maka omual ma ' a die a ' u'itar la re'eni wolim olek wa .
So he said to him , ‘ And you are to be over five cities . ' ||| Noma ray die nakot la niwra , Hota omuodi plolli la letlawna wolima .
Another came , saying , ‘ Lord , behold , your mina , which I kept laid away in a handkerchief , ||| Nhor nioma mak ka'an kai lia de dom de nmai pia nakot la tun de niwra , Tuna , kupan mina maka muala re a ' g e muanatga apitu la kokanna ralamni pa er tiy !
for I feared you , because you are an exacting man . You take up that which you did n't lay down , and reap that which you did n't sow . ' ||| Yoma a'umta'at la tuna , yoma nhi'inde tuna nhopan pa mak kar lia e ' a de , rkari werwerta . Ne orgahamu nhi'inde mua ' nek la kupan maka riy dom to ' a rkenia la noha luwuau wniatierun lawanni bank . Ne tuna niwra nwokwiok niekpa nawoka noh timni-rai timni maka tuna edonna nodia liwtu-odaw la yatniamanni .
He said to him , ‘ Out of your own mouth I will judge you , you wicked servant ! You knew that I am an exacting man , taking up that which I did n't lay down and reaping that which I did n't sow . ||| Noma ray die nakot la mak ka'an kai lia de niwra , Riy yatya'tu ne ! Hota agukum o ' a nlernohor rer lia o orgahamu lirmu . O e muatga de a ' di de riy maka khopan pa riy mak kar lia a ' u re rkari werwerta ne umatmera-wulkga'ul la'pa uwoka-ule'ga noha timanni-daharni maka a ' g edonna godia a liwtu-odwu .
Then why did n't you deposit my money in the bank , and at my coming , I might have earned interest on it ? ' ||| O ralma-riormu emkade noma nihya'pa o edonna mkien nieka a kupnu della la ' a noha luwuaunu wniatierun lawanni bank totpena amuai emkadi de orgah ' u ga ' nana kupan de nor wutga rehenu-lawanni bunga ? !
He said to those who stood by , ‘ Take the mina away from him and give it to him who has the ten minas . ' ||| Dewade ray die nakot la riy maka ktutrier wutwut lia hande pa ra'ala kupan de , ne rala la riy maka ka'itar kupan mina la re'eni termida re !
They said to him , ‘ Lord , he has ten minas ! ' ||| Mere mak ktutrieri re rakot la tun de riwra , Tuna , hade nlernan oleka kupna re'eni termida wa .
‘ For I tell you that to everyone who has , will more be given , but from him who does n't have , even that which he has will be taken away from him . ||| Mere ray die nakot la re niwra , Mhioratreria ! He ' mak khima-kre ' a lia kalwiedwedni de ir er maka klernan owa'an pa ra'itar rer lia liawanni . Mere maka edon nhima-nre ' a lia kalwiedwedni hota ha kuku ' id etla limni ralamni ho'mana ra ' momuou lia .
But bring those enemies of mine who did n't want me to reign over them here , and kill them before me . ' ||| Ne miod dodo'on memna a arwa'lu maka kahmena aghi ' a ray lia ira re pa ma mpiakriani ! Mituinia honona re aranni la a ga'yu ralamni .
Having said these things , he went on ahead , going up to Jerusalem . When he came near to Bethsphage and Bethany , at the mountain that is called Olivet , he sent two of his disciples , ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot targa hare honona nhor nia'nama Nden la gaigaini la mutlialawna pa rtawniokria letlawna Yerusalem . La'pa rwakriania leta Betfagi nora leta Betania , mak kdella wo'ora Saitun hananni , noma Nhopan pa maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy woru rala ' ulu pua rla ' a let maka ir rwakrian oleka de . Yesus Nano ' a re Niwra ,
saying , Go your way into the village on the other side , in which , as you enter , you will find a colt tied , which no man has ever sat upon . Untie it and bring it . ||| Hota la'pa mimtie'ela hande de hota mimkek nana keledai a'nani ida e nakniohu . Keledai de edonna rwatutu ma'ta nhia'ani . Ne mlieretniekla miewar doinia la pa miodia la handi .
If anyone asks you , ‘ Why are you untying it ? ' say to him , ‘ The Lord needs it . ' ||| La'pa riy ratian miy lia hya ' a nrei pia mimpie'er doinia keledai dena ? De mikot la miwra , Itmatromlawanni e Nwaka perlu de !
Those who were sent went away and found things just as he had told them . ||| Dewade riy maroro ' a re rla'awa . La ' de rlernana emolmolan nekama maka Yesus ha Nakotkota re .
As they were untying the colt , its owners said to them , Why are you untying the colt ? ||| La'pa e rewar rer mia'ta keledai a'na de , noma keledai matromni ratiana re , Hoi ! Hya ' a nrei pia mimpie'er doini keledai a'na dena ?
They said , The Lord needs it . ||| Noma rwahla riwra , Yoma Itmatromni e Nwaka de !
Then they brought it to Jesus . They threw their cloaks on the colt and sat Jesus on them . ||| Nhor nioka rodia keledai della Yesus nhor nia'nama rala ir rain plalahwani ra rwowa keledai de to'orni dewade rhima Yesus pa Nha'ata la keledai a'na de wawannu .
As he went , they spread their cloaks on the road . ||| La'pa Nha ' nana keledai a'na de pa nlola talan lawna , de rirahu rala naniair plalahwa ra rwowa la talla totpena keledai a'na maka Yesus Nha ' nan de nlola wawannu .
As he was now getting near , at the descent of the Mount of Olives , the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works which they had seen , ||| La'pa tre ' ma't oke ' a pa Yesus Nte'el la ' Yerusalem , la ' a talan maka kwatirierun la wo'or Saitun , dewade mak klernohora Yesus rirahu re honona ralamni re rahepuepru pa emariarin nana la ya'uli-yawedia la Uplerlawna yoma la ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat honona maka Yesus Nhi ' oleka re pa ir ramkek nana . Riarni-riarin la nhiaunu pa riwra ,
saying , Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord ! Peace in heaven , and glory in the highest ! ||| Ra'yu nee ! Ma'uli-mawedi , mhu'ru-mhelma O mak kmai pia kodia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni ! Dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nora rimormior nohkeran di tkalwied owa'ana . Mai pia ta'uli-tawedia , tlilili-tmamuau Uplerlawna la tutullu-lolo'oni !
Some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him , Teacher , rebuke your disciples ! ||| Noma riy Parisi doma mak kden wut lia rirahu re rakot la Yesus riwra , Tungkurga , Mhuopan pa maklernohor reri O ' a re ramolmuolga !
He answered them , I tell you that if these were silent , the stones would cry out . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni re Niwra , Mpuesiay A'go , hota hare rherier wia mere hota watgau ri rhaur la polpuolu-hawaunu re !
When he came near , he saw the city and wept over it , ||| La'pa Yesus Nwakriarian liol wa la ' a letlawna Yerusalem , dewade Namkek reria let de na'nama Nkakur nohora .
saying , If you , even you , had known today the things which belong to your peace ! But now , they are hidden from your eyes . ||| Noma Nakot la Yerusalem Niwra , A ralmu e ntuin tiy o ' a Yerusalem ee ! Awuak memna totpa o ' nek de , muat nohora he ' mak la ' ler di de kodi plolli pa nodia kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy o ' a . Mere la ' dodo'ondi de loi-talan la kalwieda-paitiot de emeka ha yawunamnu la o matmu yamkekni .
For the days will come on you when your enemies will throw up a barricade against you , surround you , hem you in on every side , ||| Pede hota la ' lera ida , hota o arwalmu lol walli-walli pa rariria luturwatu-werantuini pa rle'lu reri o'ola letgara totpena riy mak kden la o ralammu de yana rawlari .
and will dash you and your children within you to the ground . They will not leave in you one stone on another , because you did n't know the time of your visitation . ||| Hota rweyata-rwaniag wutga omuora rimormiormu . Lutur lawanni id mana edonna napniadar la id wawannu . Hota omuora rimormiormu mimliernan hade yoma miy edonna mrieiniana-mia'nan Uplerlawna la ' lera maka Niwra Nma Namori-nalewna miy .
He entered into the temple and began to drive out those who bought and sold in it , ||| Yesus Nla'awa Uplerlawna roma kreini herni-gaini na'nama Nhokra-nlaiya mak ka'olu-kala ' a kaweli-kaphar la hande .
saying to them , It is written , ‘ My house is a house of prayer , ' but you have made it a ‘ den of robbers ' ! ||| Yesus Nakot la mak ka'olu-kala ' a re Niwra , E rhorat tar olek la Puka ralamni Uplerlawna lirni de Niwra , Hota A ro'mu de sniumbain genia de , mere miy e mhi ' a la roma kamnelu-kamna ' geni !
He was teaching daily in the temple , but the chief priests , the scribes , and the leading men among the people sought to destroy him . ||| La ' lera-ler nekpa Yesus Nwatutu-nwaye'ela Uplerlawna roma kreini . Mere imam-imam o'tani-matni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama me Yahudi o'tani-matni rwaror pa rwenna Yesus .
They could n't find what they might do , for all the people hung on to every word that he said . ||| Mere edonna rlernan ma'ta talan pa rwenna yoma rirahu rmaimiai rer pia ratlina-ratailia lirni-tunnu , ne lirni-tunnu re rla ' nana rira ihranu ralamni .
On one of those days , as he was teaching the people in the temple and preaching the Good News , the priests and scribes came to him with the elders . ||| La'awa la ' lera ida , de Yesus Ntepartarlia wniatutu-wniaye ' a me Nakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawu Uplerlawna la ' a riy mak kden la Uplerlawna roma kreini de . Noma imam-imam o'tani-matni re me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama , ror wutga Yahudi in letni-am letni rmai pia
They asked him , Tell us , by what authority do you do these things ? Or who is giving you this authority ? ||| rakot la Yesus riwra , Tuna , Mukot nohora tek la mai ami , de he ' ed mak ktemna plola-mneh della ' O limmu ralamni pede Omhi ' nan hihi'imu-yapyapmu rena ?
He answered them , I also will ask you one question . Tell me , ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni re Niwra , A ' g e giwra utian tek wali miy . Mikot nohor teka !
the baptism of John , was it from heaven , or from men ? ||| Yohansi makharan die , ha nlernan plol della he ' a ? Uplerlawna onde rimormiori ?
They reasoned with themselves , saying , If we say , ‘ From heaven , ' he will say , ‘ Why did n't you believe him ? ' ||| Dewade honona re rwahu'ru ralma-riora wamueh ' a pa riwra , La'pa itwet la Uplerlawna ed mak kala plolli la Yohansi de hota Eniwra , Ne hya ' a nrei pia miy edonna mpiesiay e ' a ?
But if we say , ‘ From men , ' all the people will stone us , for they are persuaded that John was a prophet . ||| Mere la'pa itiwra rimormiori plolli-mneheni hade de hota riy honona rala watu ra rwatliewur wen ita yoma riy rpesiaya de Yohansi de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id hade !
They answered that they did n't know where it was from . ||| Pede honona rla ' lir id pa rwahla Yesus riwra , Ami e maplinga de ha nlernan plol della he ' a .
Jesus said to them , Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hade emkade , de A ' muana edonna ukot wahyaria tiy miy la ' a he ' a mak kala plolli mai A ' pua Aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi re .
He began to tell the people this parable , A man planted a vineyard and rented it out to some farmers , and went into another country for a long time . ||| Dewade Yesus Nwahaur nohor la ira , la ' a yawalliohora id la ' a rirahu re Niwra , Ornoha ida nawuli-natniamin anggur wo ' a la nhyi'ini-tlunanni ralamni . Nhor nia'nama nala nhyi'-tlunni anggur della riy rtimnia . Na'nama nla nlaun la riy ornoha pa mahnek meman la hande .
At the proper season , he sent a servant to the farmers to collect his share of the fruit of the vineyard . But the farmers beat him and sent him away empty . ||| La'pa ntutu la lerni-melli pa riwra rreiki-rwo'or wa , noma ora nhyi ' de nhopna e hopopanni-li'irnu id pa nmai pia na'ala ora nhyi ' a nhiakarni la timanni-daharni . Mere mak ktimni-kdahara rwaldioin targho ' pa rwanalga ora nhyi ' a hopopanni-li'irnu de na'nama rhopan pa nawal die nhapirteum nan to ' a .
He sent yet another servant , and they also beat him and treated him shamefully , and sent him away empty . ||| Noma ora nhyi ' de nhopn owa'ana hopopanni id owa'ana . Mere emkade walia rliwra-rkaklia na'nama rahe ' i-ramalia pa rhopan pa nawal die nhapirteum nan to ' a .
He sent yet a third , and they also wounded him and threw him out . ||| Nhor nioma ora nhyi'-tlunni de na'enyatg owa'an hopopanni mak la'pa re'eni wotellu , mere ha nlernan walia liwliwra-kakaklu pa namno ' a-namrara na'nama rte'la la'pa rhopliala la nhyi ' a to'orni .
The lord of the vineyard said , ‘ What shall I do ? I will send my beloved son . It may be that seeing him , they will respect him . ' ||| La ' pa hohoni dewade ora nhyi'-tlunni de nhar lirni pa niwra , Hota a'uhak owa'an hya ' tallo ? Hade emkade de pena A ' u'enyatga a a'nu maka a siayn memna . Meman neka la hota e ' de hare rhu'ru-rhelma .
But when the farmers saw him , they reasoned among themselves , saying , ‘ This is the heir . Come , let 's kill him , that the inheritance may be ours . ' ||| Mere la'pa ramkek tut niana ora nhyi'-tlunni de a'nani de dewade idma nakot la ida , riwra , Maka hota kodi plolli la ononni e inhatti ! Mai pia itatuinia aranni totpena nhyi'ini-tlunanni di , it gahani !
Then they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him . What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them ? ||| Dewade rnaklia riy de la nhyi ' de to'orni na'nama rwenna . Noma Yesus Natiana la mak katlina re Niwra , Nah ! La'pa ora nhyi ' de nawal pia nmai de hota hya ' ed maka ha nhi ' a la maktimni-makdahara reno ?
He will come and destroy these farmers , and will give the vineyard to others . When they heard that , they said , May that never be ! ||| Hota nma nhapartikil nohora re ne hota nwenna re , totpena nal to ' a la riy doma rtimnia . La'pa riy mak katlin nan hade , de rna'erit nana lir de nnia'eratni , noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Hota emkameni ho'mana hota yana rhi ' emkade !
But he looked at them and said , Then what is this that is written , ‘ The stone which the builders rejected was made the chief cornerstone ' ? ||| Noma Yesus Namkek tertehra na'nama Nakot la re Niwra , La'pa emek miy lirmi re pa hota edon emkade , de emkameni targho'ola Puka lirni la ' a wat muaka ha rtot nohora la Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar dena ? Yoma e rakot taru la Puka de , Wat muaka tukna edonna rnair nana pa rhi ' a roma-lewu , mere rhopliala , de Uplerlawna Nnairi oleka pa Nhi ' a la watu liar pianulu .
Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces , but it will crush whomever it falls on to dust . ||| Riy honona mak ktuin pa ktaiya wat die onde riy maka wat die nwaklol niana de hota ramkoha-ramnana pa rwal lia en liu'wu-tan miakmu .
The chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on him that very hour , but they feared the people-for they knew he had spoken this parable against them . ||| Makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama me imam-imam re o'tani-matni rat niohora la yawalliohora maka Yesus Nakota de , de Enakot nohor ira . Pede rwahak talan pa rtorna Yesus la ' ler de memna , mere ramta'at rer lia ' rirahu .
They watched him and sent out spies , who pretended to be righteous , that they might trap him in something he said , so as to deliver him up to the power and authority of the governor . ||| Pede ramkek rer lia Yesus yanpa hota Nhi ' hala . Rhopna riy pa rla ratian la ' a-mai Yesus emeka e riwra rat niohora Yesus lirni-tunnu mere plollolli de e riwra rtot e ' pa Nweta lir maka edonna klola o'ta-mata re wniarorni , nanpena o'ta-mata re rla rwet targa la mak kodi plolli doma maka kden la gubernur tnioranni-riautnu .
They asked him , Teacher , we know that you say and teach what is right , and are n't partial to anyone , but truly teach the way of God . ||| Noma riy maka ha rhopna re rma rakot la Yesus riwra , Tungkurga , ami e matga de O ' di de nanpena maka kakot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplollola . Amatga de riy plele'er id O ' a . O ' e Mpuatut die Mukot nohora plollolli la Uplerlawna ralma-rior kalwiedwedni la ' a rimormiori , de O ' edonna Mhue'du nan etia riy ralma-riorni yoma riy lalawna onde riy kuku'uni ho'mana O ' edonna Mpuadan nohora .
Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar , or not ? ||| La ' hade pede Mukot teka la mai ami , la ' it agamni deullu-tatarni nakot am pia ampairia blastena la ' a mak ktorna horta-hairi Romawi Kaisar onde yana ?
But he perceived their craftiness , and said to them , Why do you test me ? ||| Mere ir ralma riorni mak edon kaplola de Yesus Nat niohor oleka re pede Nakot la re ,
Show me a denarius . Whose image and inscription are on it ? They answered , Caesar 's . ||| Mi'al tek la kupan dinar id pa mtiut tieka mai A ' u , de he ' a herni-gaini me he ' nanni mak kden la kupan de ? Noma rwet la riwra , Ray mak ktorna horta-hairi Romawi Kaisar o'tani inhat ee !
He said to them , Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar 's , and to God the things that are God 's . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Hade emkade , miala kupan maka ray herni-gaini etla de la ' a ray , yoma hanni hade . Ne miala la Uplerlawna hya ' maka Uplerlawna gahani wali .
They were n't able to trap him in his words before the people . They marveled at his answer and were silent . ||| Pede ta'en niana rtot Yesus la hala wawannu la riy mutlialawna gaini ralamni . Honona re mtulu-mtie'el tar momuoga yoma rwer rer wiawni la ' a Yesus lirni-tunnu maka ha ratiana re honona .
Some of the Sadducees came to him , those who deny that there is a resurrection . ||| Noma Saduki riy doma rmai pia ratian nohora Yesus la ' a emkameni la riy mak kmati hota rmori owa'ana , yoma Saduki re er mak edonna kpesiaya riy mak kmati hota rmori owa'ana .
They asked him , Teacher , Moses wrote to us that if a man 's brother dies having a wife , and he is childless , his brother should take the wife and raise up children for his brother . ||| Riwra , Tungkurga , Musa e nhorat targa mai ita , de emkadilla , La'pa muanke ' ida nmati mere nakleh ma'ta a'na , de muanke ' a mak kmat die hyalli nor owa'an yerni patyat de rmehlima , totpena rlernana hyalli mak kmati olek de duratni-waitni .
There were therefore seven brothers . The first took a wife , and died childless . ||| Mere la ' lera ida , de muanke ' a riy wo'itu rwahyal riaralma . Noma yanulu nmehlima , mere edonna nlernan ma'ta a'na , ne nmat wia .
The second took her as wife , and he died childless . ||| Noma garni mak klernohor hyalli nora yerni rmehlima mere edonna nlernan wal mia'ta a'na noma nmati wali .
The third took her , and likewise the seven all left no children , and died . ||| La'pa emkade wali la ' a hyalli re korni re ror owa'an yerni de rmehlima mere id mana nakleh ma'ta a'na de rmat wia pa emkade mamain pa nodi liarni pa la ntutu mueman la gari hoho ' a .
Afterward the woman also died . ||| La'awa hohoni noma pat de mana nmat wia , mere nakleh etia a'na ida .
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them will she be ? For the seven had her as a wife . ||| Pede la'pa la'awa lerni pa mak kmati honona rmori owa'ana , de hota he ' hawni patke ' a dena ? Yoma mak kwahyali re wo'itu meman pa rora pat de rmehlima .
Jesus said to them , The children of this age marry and are given in marriage . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Riy maka kmormior mia'ta la nohkeran di , de e rmehlima .
But those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage . ||| Mere riy maka ha rwalir nian pa hota rmori owa'an la matmiatni pa rdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha , de hota edonna rmehlim owa'ana .
For they ca n't die any more , for they are like the angels and are children of God , being children of the resurrection . ||| Yoma yehwani re emeknekama Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu pa hota edonna rlernan owa'an matmiati la ' a Uplerlawna gen warwuarnu . Rwet olek ir la Uplerlawna upni-a'nani , yoma Uplerlawna Namori-nalewn olek ir la ' matmiati ralamni .
But that the dead are raised , even Moses showed at the bush , when he called the Lord ‘ The God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . ' ||| Nah ! Miy die edon mimpiesiaya de hota mak kmati rmori owa'ana , mere Musa orgahani nek de enakot momuoga de hota riy mak kmati mana rmori owa'ana . Yoma e nhorat taru Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni maka Musa natlin nana la ' ler maka Musa nlernan ai la ' a pu'na-kiarti ralamni de . Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni emkadi , A ' di de Abrahama , Isaka me Yakopa Uplerlawna ma'ta A ' u . Nakot emkade kennama Abraham , Isak me Yakopa rmati olekwa .
Now he is not the God of the dead , but of the living , for all are alive to him . ||| Uplerlawna upni-a'nani honona la'pa rmati oleka ho'mana Uplerlawna Natga hota rmori owa'ana . Uplerlawan de , riy mak kmati Uplerlawanni atia ' a hade . E ' de de , mak kmormiori Uplerlawanni E ' a .
Some of the scribes answered , Teacher , you speak well . ||| Noma makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama dom rakot la Yesus riwra , Am tungkurg ee , mak ompuet la re , id mana edonna nhal eti !
They did n't dare to ask him any more questions . ||| Dewade riy id mana edonna nparan pia nhar lirni pa natiana Yesus .
He said to them , Why do they say that the Christ is David 's son ? ||| Noma Yesus Natiana re , Hya ' a nariei pia riwra Ray Makamori-Kalewan maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru , de Daud duratni-waitni hade ?
David himself says in the book of Psalms , ‘ The Lord said to my Lord , Sit at my right hand , ||| Daud nmeh ' a nek de e nhorat targa la ' a Puka Masmur la ' a Uplerlawna lirni la Ray Makamori-Kalewan de niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot la a Matromlawnu Yesus Niwra , Muliwnu Mumtatnu la ' A wa'lu malganna .
until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet . ' ||| La'pa Aghi ' a arwalmu re pa rwaltior la O lakmu nayanni .
David therefore calls him Lord , so how is he his son ? ||| La'pa Ray Daud nwet la Ray Makamori-Kalewna , niwra e Matromlawanni , de nihya'pa mikota ray Daud duratni E ' a ?
In the hearing of all the people , he said to his disciples , ||| La'pa rirahu ertepartarlia ratlin la Yesus lirni-tunnu , noma Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra ,
Beware of those scribes who like to walk in long robes , and love greetings in the marketplaces , the best seats in the synagogues , and the best places at feasts , ||| Erammi la ' a tungkurga agama re ! Nhi'inde rala ' nohora raini plalahwani totpena riy ramkek de riy mak inponni ira me ir suksukni de riy ral ir la rekna-waiti la ' a ya'olu-yala ' geni . Rler la Yahudi kreini-iskolli ralamni de rtota gen miak kden la gaini me la ' a he ' i-hepru la ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna , de rahak geni samomuou totpa riy ra'uli ira , nanpena ramtatna la ' hande .
who devour widows ' houses , and for a pretense make long prayers . These will receive greater condemnation . ||| Ra'ohpa-ralahara a'na riy patyata me reyahru romni-lewnu . Ne rsumbain de plo ' a-plahwa la rirahu gaini ralamni totpa ra rtutwua ir do'oni-halli . Mere hade mak karei pia rlernana niukum mak hota kwerwerta maka nareh dioin niukum maka riy dom to ' a rlernana .
He looked up and saw the rich people who were putting their gifts into the treasury . ||| La ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini de Yesus Nran matni pa Namkek la mak ktar kupna-kai rkenia kupan la krei ktoparni .
He saw a certain poor widow casting in two small brass coins . ||| Yesus Namkek walia a'na riy patyata ida nken wialia sena wor lia ' a ktopar de ralamni .
He said , Truly I tell you , this poor widow put in more than all of them , ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Mitlina , patyat di ed mak kenia liawanni la ' a riy honona .
for all these put in gifts for God from their abundance , but she , out of her poverty , put in all that she had to live on . ||| Yoma rirahu mak keni olekwa re narehi-nalawna yoma re'eni-tniarnu harahu . Mere patyat di de nakleha-naplara mere mak ha nala re de , eneknek hare to ' a pede nwatul nana pa nal momuoga .
As some were talking about the temple and how it was decorated with beautiful stones and gifts , he said , ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re dom rwahaur nohora Uplerlawna roma kreini samomuounu nee ! Yoma rnairia watgau samomuou pa rariria me rala himima-rere ' a mak samomuou memna totpa rhi ' Uplerlawna roma kreini pa samomuowa . Mere Yesus Nakota la re Niwra ,
As for these things which you see , the days will come in which there will not be left here one stone on another that will not be thrown down . ||| Hota la'pa nte'ela lerni de hya ' maka ha mimkeka re de hota rweyata-rwaniawu momuoga . Wat muaka kapnidara re de hota id mana edonna nalliapar id wawannu .
They asked him , Teacher , so when will these things be ? What is the sign that these things are about to happen ? ||| Dewade maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana Yesus riwra , Tungkuru , hota mowen die itamkeka maka Omukota re ? Ne hota hya ' ed maka tamkek ulga totpena nwagahniort it la hota lera-mela inhatta ?
He said , Watch out that you do n't get led astray , for many will come in my name , saying , ‘ I am he , ' and , ‘ The time is at hand . ' Therefore do n't follow them . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mi'ererma ! Yanpa rhi ' aklierat miy la ' a A maimia'yu de . Hota rirahu rmai die rnairia A na'nu pa riwra , Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru A ' g inhatti ! Ne lera noha niatni nwakrian wia ! Mere yan memmemna mliernohor oo !
When you hear of wars and disturbances , do n't be terrified , for these things must happen first , but the end wo n't come immediately . ||| Me la'pa riy rodia kota-de'eta wunu-ara la ' a hairi-hairi onde la ' a leta-leta , yan mimta'ata . Yoma hota hare honona re de nayamkek ulu , mere noha niatni de edon ntutu-nte ' ma'ta .
Then he said to them , Nation will rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . ||| Hota hairi nor hairi rawunu-rawenna , me noha-rai nora noha-rai rawo'ora .
There will be great earthquakes , famines , and plagues in various places . There will be terrors and great signs from heaven . ||| Ne plinu-plinnianama lol meni-meni to ' pa upkarururu mak karuri . Rehka-lara me nnieni-nhiena mana , nwewra noha-rai . Ne la ' a lyanti mana tamkek neka yamta'ata hya ' mak kamehi-kayona karieiniande riy ramta'at meman la hota hya ' ed mak kmai nieka .
But before all these things , they will lay their hands on you and will persecute you , delivering you up to synagogues and prisons , bringing you before kings and governors for my name 's sake . ||| Mere la'pa hare honona edonan ma'ta de , hota rtoran miy pia rnahora-rnala ' a , ramuki-rama'al miy . Me rod miy lia watghudi lokarni la ' a geni-tien maka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli la re pa rho'la tar miy . Ne hota rnun miy lia ray-ray gaini ralamni , me la ' walia o'ta-mat lalawna re dom pali , yoma mimliernohor reri A ' u .
It will turn out as a testimony for you . ||| Hade ed maka hota mimliernan talan pa mikot nohor Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ira .
Settle it therefore in your hearts not to meditate beforehand how to answer , ||| Mimpiaror samomuou plein totpa hota yana ihrami rteplu la ' a hya ' a ed maka hota ha miwra mikot pa ma miod niana inonmi .
for I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries will not be able to withstand or to contradict . ||| Yoma hota A orgah ' u ed mak kala lira mak kodi kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou tiy miy , totpena miy arwalmi id mana , edonna nlernan talan pa namer matni pa nreher doinia ha mikota re .
You will be handed over even by parents , brothers , relatives , and friends . They will cause some of you to be put to death . ||| Hota inmi-ammi inmi-narmi lupmi-rommi me tupwalmi-lawalmi nekane e rehera-rwat dioin miy lia ne rwunu-rwenna riy dom makpesiay .
You will be hated by all men for my name 's sake . ||| Ne riy la ' meni-meni to ' a hota rahankeran rer tiy miy , yoma mimliernohor reri A ' u .
And not a hair of your head will perish . ||| Mere rwunu-rwenan miy inonmi ho'mana ta'en nian memna rhi ' oruli-augewat la miy pa mlier wutga Uplerlawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
By your endurance you will win your lives . ||| Pa la'pa miy e mtiorrer pitpitga pesiaymi , de hota mliernana mormiori-lewlewna plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies , then know that its desolation is at hand . ||| La'pa mimkek neka mak kawunu-ka'ara rmai pia rle'lu reria leta Yerusalem , de hota mimpiahniorat nana , hota edon nalo'on wali ne rweyata-rwaniaga let de .
Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains . Let those who are in the middle of her depart . Let those who are in the country not enter therein . ||| A'ukot tiy miy totpena la ' ler de hota miy mak kden la Yudea miwlar lia ' wo'ora hananni . Mak kden la leta ralamni , de rawlar dioinia leta , ne mak kden la leta to'orni yana rler la leta ralamni .
For these are days of vengeance , that all things which are written may be fulfilled . ||| Yoma la ' lera-mela re de hota niukum lawna nmai wia , totpena la ' hade pa mak ha rakot targa la Puka ralamni de ntutu-nte'ewa
Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who nurse infants in those days ! For there will be great distress in the land and wrath to this people . ||| Adoh ! La ' ler de pat mak ka'uhu-ka'apnu , ne la ' a pat mak nuh reria a'nani re rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni . Hota mak kden Israel nohoni rlernan kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a , yamuki-yama'ala yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a hota Nukmu luwnu-a'nani de .
They will fall by the edge of the sword , and will be led captive into all the nations . Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled . ||| Hota rdawar wenna doma ne rodia dom de ran nan wutwutga limni pa rodia la Yahudi atia ' a honona nohoni . Ne riy mak Yahudi atia ' a de hota rwatei-rwahapra Yerusalem pa nodia la'pa lera-mela wo'ira maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot targa oleka wa la Yahudi atia ' a re .
There will be signs in the sun , moon , and stars , and on the earth anxiety of nations , in perplexity for the roaring of the sea and the waves , ||| Hota la ' a lyanti de tamkek nan memna maka kamehi-kayona ajaib la lera , wolla , me wtiona mak karieiniande riy ramta'at wenna la ' a hya ' mak hota kmai nieka . Maiya noh wawannu de makden la hairi-hairi hota ramta'at nande rhakomu-rhakam niohora yo'or lawna-anin lawna yetanni .
men fainting for fear and for expectation of the things which are coming on the world , for the powers of the heavens will be shaken . ||| Hota rimormiori ramta'at nande rtuin pa raplin niohora inonni yoma ramta'ata hota hya ' ed maka kwal lia riwtu-hora mai noheri wor dino ? Yoma maka kodi plolli la ' a darta-lyanti mana hota nawniatiri-nawnialiakra .
Then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory . ||| La'awa ler de dewade rimormiori ramkek reria Rimormiori A'na Amuai owa'ana pa Adiella kakma wawannu , de Agodia A plo'lu-mneh ' u , A preh ' u-mka'yu mak kamehi-kayona la liplipa-kamka'mani .
But when these things begin to happen , look up and lift up your heads , because your redemption is near . ||| La'pa mimkek nan hare honona dewade mhi ' aruri miy ihrami-ralammi me mihepuepur nohora yoma hota edon nalo'on wali ne mlier la mori-lewna .
He told them a parable . See the fig tree and all the trees . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahaur nohora yawalliohora Niwra , Mimpiaror teka la ' a kar ona nor wutga ora-au re korni .
When they are already budding , you see it and know by your own selves that the summer is already near . ||| La'pa mimkek nekpa uhwanu re rden la , de miatga lerwarnu nwakrian wia .
Even so you also , when you see these things happening , know that God 's Kingdom is near . ||| Hota emkade wal lia mimkeka hare honona mak A'ukot nohora olek diwa de miatg oleka de , edon nalo'on wali ne Uplerlawna Nte'la la lodanni-hairni pa emekwali Ray .
Most certainly I tell you , this generation will not pass away until all things are accomplished . ||| Totpa miatga ! Riy la ' tuwu di de edon rmat mia'ta , de hare honona mak ukot nohor oleka di hota rtutu-rte'ewa . A li'ru ri raplola .
Heaven and earth will pass away , but my words will by no means pass away . ||| Hota lyanti nora nohkeran di mana rmolu-rhelam wa mere A li'ru-tu'nu de ndella pa nodi liarni .
So be careful , or your hearts will be loaded down with carousing , drunkenness , and cares of this life , and that day will come on you suddenly . For it will come like a snare on all those who dwell on the surface of all the earth . ||| Erammi la temmi , yanpa mpiehera-mia'wu la ya'ana-yemnu pa mhi ' yatyatni-halalli , onde mpiarora-mpialaiya mormiormi pa mhiortaplinga hya ' mak kla ' nana Uplerlawna riorni pa narieiniande mhioratdoin walia ler maka hota plin-plinnianama nte ' a hmuakur wa . Yoma hota ler de nte'ewa de rimormior honona mak kden la noha wawannu di mtatan de rheduma emekwalima hiwi maka ma'nu ha nlakam nana .
Therefore be watchful all the time , praying that you may be counted worthy to escape all these things that will happen , and to stand before the Son of Man . ||| Nhioratmi la temmi me msiumbain rer lia Orgahi-Orha ' a totpena la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la riwtu-hora ri , mimlier la yamori-yalewna me totpa la ' ler de mitatahan nek ralamni la ' hare honona me mdien rer lia pesiaymi , totpena hota la ' ler maka Rimormiori A'na A ' die Muai godia watghudi lokarni , mlia ' meman pa mipal wiut lia A ' die edon mimta'ata , mere mimuki-mihepru nohora .
Every day Jesus was teaching in the temple , and every night he would go out and spend the night on the mountain that is called Olivet . ||| Yesus Nwatut lia Uplerlawna roma kreini la lera-lera , ne la'pa mel wa demade Nla'awa la ' a wo'ora Saitun ne Nanin la hande .
All the people came early in the morning to him in the temple to hear him . ||| Pa la ' yawyawar la ' a lera-ler nekpa riy honona rma rapur temna la krei totpena ratlin la Yesus Nakotkota .
Now the feast of unleavened bread , which is called the Passover , was approaching . ||| La ' lerlalawan Yahudi maka ra'ana rot miaka edonna rnairia tgo ' a , de nhi ' pa nrehgor wua . Ler de ed maka ha rweta la Paska lerni , de la ' a ler maka Yahudi re rhoratreria ir tuini-wedni la ler maka ralewan la ' a kokohoga la ' a Mesir .
The chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put him to death , for they feared the people . ||| Noma imam-imam o'tani-matni re rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama rwahak talan pa rwenna Yesus la ' a wunwunamnu , yoma ramta'at rer lia rirahu , yanpa hota rhi ' kokokna-rariarni .
Satan entered into Judas , who was also called Iscariot , who was counted with the twelve . ||| Noma hegana amlawanni narialmua Yudas maka ha rwet walia la Iskariot . Yudas di de riy id la maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re termida wehrani woru inhatta re .
He went away and talked with the chief priests and captains about how he might deliver him to them . ||| Noma Yudas nla ' pa nora imam-imam o'tani-matni me o'ta-mat la maka katiak reria Uplerlawna roma kreini , pa nora rwahu'ru ralma-rior la ' a talan emkameni totpena e ' ed maka kodia Yesus pa na'olga la ira .
They were glad , and agreed to give him money . ||| Honona re ralamni re rahepru me rwayop pa rla lir ida totpena hota ral kupan la Yudas .
He consented and sought an opportunity to deliver him to them in the absence of the multitude . ||| Yudas Nwayow nohora nnia'ohma-nniakat de noma la'pa e nwahakhak talla emkameni pa ntorna Yesus totpena nala la imam-imam o'tani-matni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re de yana riy ratga .
The day of unleavened bread came , on which the Passover must be sacrificed . ||| La ' pa nte'ela lerlalawna maka Yahudi re ha ra'ana roti mak kakleha tgo ' a . La ' ler de meman wal pia nhi'inde rteti-rlaiya dum a'na maka ha riwra ra'an la ' a Paska lerni de .
Jesus sent Peter and John , saying , Go and prepare the Passover for us , that we may eat . ||| Noma Yesus Nhopan pa Petrus nora Yohansi rla pa rwahi ' targa ya'ana-yemnia Paska maka ha riwra ra'ana .
They said to him , Where do you want us to prepare ? ||| Noma Petrus nora Yohansi ratiana Yesus riwra , Tuna , Omiwra hota ampahi ' targa ya'ana-yemnu rella hanme ?
He said to them , Behold , when you have entered into the city , a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you . Follow him into the house which he enters . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hota la'pa mlier la leta ralamni , de muanke ' a ida na nodia ger kekna ida hota nwatrom nan miy . Enlol meni-meni mana mimrio ' a mliernohor reria pa miora mlia'awa la ' a rom maka ha ntawniokur nan de ,
Tell the master of the house , ‘ The Teacher says to you , Where is the guest room , where I may eat the Passover with my disciples ? ' ||| ne mlia ' pa mikot la orrom de miwra , A tungkur mamni Natian o ' a la ' a gen mieni ed mak rwahi ' targ olek pa Enora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rewre'wa pa ra'an yamanan Paska ?
He will show you a large , furnished upper room . Make preparations there . ||| Hota orrom de ntutga gen liawna mak kden la roma la ' heyanna , de npenpuen niohora meini-kaderni me lola-wra ' u . Pena mpiahi ' a hare honona la ' hande .
They went , found things as Jesus had told them , and they prepared the Passover . ||| Noma Petrus nora Yohansi rla'awa de rlernana hya ' maka Yesus ha Nakotkota re ! Noma rrora rwahi ' a-rwayod tiarga ya'ana-yemnia Paska .
When the hour had come , he sat down with the twelve apostles . ||| La'pa nte'ela lerni pa riwra ra'ana Paska de , noma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani woru re makodia E lirni , ra'an wut lia mei wawannu .
He said to them , I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hyalmi ree ! A ralmu niwra Agor wut meman miy pia ita'ana Paska dilla mei di wawannu , la'pa nhor nianpena alier la kropanni-krieutnu .
for I tell you , I will no longer by any means eat of it until it is fulfilled in God 's Kingdom . ||| Pena mpiesiay A'go , hota A ' g edonna 'un owa'ana ya'an Paska di pa la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' ler maka mimlier la yamori-yalewna la ' a Uplerlawna genni maka Ntorna-nrautu emeka Ray .
He received a cup , and when he had given thanks , he said , Take this and share it among yourselves , ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nrana lar miaka anggur turnu handella , na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna nhor nia'nama Niwra , Mia'ala hadi pa riy nenenna remnu !
for I tell you , I will not drink at all again from the fruit of the vine , until God 's Kingdom comes . ||| Yoma totpa miatga , hota A ' g edonna gemnia anggur turnu owa'ana la'pa nte'ela ' lerni Agor Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona temun wutga anggur tur warwuarnu la ' a A A'mu genni maka Ntorna-nrautu emeka Ray .
He took bread , and when he had given thanks , he broke and gave it to them , saying , This is my body which is given for you . Do this in memory of me . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Na'ala roti , na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna , noma Nhawi-nhawia rot die na'nama Nhakre'era la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re na'nama Niwra , Hadi de A ino'nu inhatti mak Agala la miy rerieimi . Mi'in hadi totpena nhioratmi nden reri la A matmia'tu pa nodi liarni .
Likewise , he took the cup after supper , saying , This cup is the new covenant in my blood , which is poured out for you . ||| Emkade walia la'pa ra'an pa nhorwua , noma Na ' owa'an lari maka rkeni anggur turnu na'nama Niwra , Anggur tur di A ra'ru maka ha rhuria yoma miy rerieimi totpa rhi ' aplola Uplerlawna nnio ' warwuarnu tiy miy .
But behold , the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table . ||| Mere miy mhioratrerio ! Riy mak ka'olga A ' di de e nor wutga it la mei di .
The Son of Man indeed goes as it has been determined , but woe to that man through whom he is betrayed ! ||| Plola , hota Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota Amuati , emeknekama Uplerlawna Nakot tar oleka de . Mere hota la'pa he ' ed mak ka'olga Rimormior A'na de , adoh ! Riy de hota nler meman la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani .
They began to question among themselves which of them it was who would do this thing . ||| Noma ir idma napal lia id pa ratian lol etnu-liolli riwra hota he ' a mai it de maka khi ' a-kyapia maka Yesus Nakota re ?
A dispute also arose among them , which of them was considered to be greatest . ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rawo'or pa idma nakot la ida riwra , La it di de he ' ed maka inponni kareh it hononit la handino ?
He said to them , The kings of the nations lord it over them , and those who have authority over them are called ‘ benefactors . ' ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Ray-ray la ' a luwu-a'na mak edonna kat niohora Uplerlawna , de rwatei-rwahapra limni-rorni mere iriwra ir orgahi de maka ktulan la limni-rorni .
But not so with you . Rather , the one who is greater among you , let him become as the younger , and one who is governing , as one who serves . ||| Mere yana mliernohora hare nhiolli . Mere riy meni la ' a miy die maka inponni , de hota mpialdioinia pa mhi ' a inonmi emeka riy kuku ' selma ida . Ne miy mak kodi plolli de hota mpialdioinia pa mtiutga inonmi emeka mak ha rhopna .
For who is greater , one who sits at the table , or one who serves ? Is n't it he who sits at the table ? But I am among you as one who serves . ||| A'utian tek miy , la ' miy wniarorni de he ' ed mak inponni , la'pa mak ka'an la mei wawannu onde la ' a riy maka khoi-ktania e ' a ? Meman nek la mak ka'an la mei to ' a ! Emkade walia la ' a miy matrommi A ' die , A ' g ed maka inponni mere Amueh ' a neka tiutga A ino'nu tiy miy de , A ' g ed makhi ' a mak khoi-ktani miy .
But you are those who have continued with me in my trials . ||| La ' ler maka Alier olek la kropna-krieutu , de miy er maka mdien rer wut mai A ' u .
I confer on you a kingdom , even as my Father conferred on me , ||| Ne la'pa emkameni la A A'mu Nal mai A pua Atiorna-riautu , de hota emkade wal pia Agala tiy miy pia mior rewre ' w A ' pua mtiorna-mriautu .
that you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom . You will sit on thrones , judging the twelve tribes of Israel . ||| La'pa A lia ' oleka Ray wia , de miy miana hota mior A ' pua ta'ana-temnu tamuki-tahepur rewre'wa . Ne hota miy er maka kamtatan la ' a ray liwangeni termida wehrani woru re hananni , totpena miodi plolli la Israel luwnu-a'nani termida wehrani woru re .
The Lord said , Simon , Simon , behold , Satan asked to have all of you , that he might sift you as wheat , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Simon Petrus Niwra , Mere Simon ee ! Mutlin reri o ! Uplerlawna Nwayow nohora hegana amlawanni pa nta'ag miy hononmi pa emeknekama ramoga wetra ' lawna la ' a ulatni nor ihini , totpena samomuounu lol to'ola yatyatni .
but I prayed for you , that your faith would n't fail . You , when once you have turned again , establish your brothers . ||| Mere Asiumbaini olek o'owa Simona totpa pesiaymu yana nmadwuri . Ne la'pa omuwali owa'an mai A ' die mhi ' arur miemna hyalmu re .
He said to him , Lord , I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death ! ||| Noma Petrus nwahla Yesus lirni niwra , Matroma , hota la ' emkameni ho'mana a ' g edonna wuadur la roma nhio'la ralamni , ne amuat niohora Matro'mu !
He said , I tell you , Peter , the rooster will by no means crow today until you deny that you know me three times . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mhuoratreria Petrusa , hota hiwi lallu edonna nkukule ' ma'ta la ' ler di de hota omueh ' a nekpa mrieher doin A lia ' re'eni wotelu .
He said to them , When I sent you out without purse , bag , and sandals , did you lack anything ? They said , Nothing . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La ' ler maka Aghopan miy pia mlia ' mikot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota de , A ' g edonna wuayopa miodia kupan geni , arkai , onde laka wniowa pa mhierun doin laka wniowni maka miy mniairi de . La ' ler maka miy edon miodi hare , de mikleha hadomdoma ? Honona riwra , Edonna , Matroma !
Then he said to them , But now , whoever has a purse , let him take it , and likewise a bag . Whoever has none , let him sell his cloak , and buy a sword . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mere la ' dodo'ondi de he ' a kupan genni onde tangkunu etla de miodia re , me he ' mak kakleha wehla plalahwa de mi'ol dioinia raini plalahwami re pa ma miwelia wehla plalahwa .
For I tell you that this which is written must still be fulfilled in me , ‘ He was counted with transgressors . ' For that which concerns me is being fulfilled . ||| Yoma mpiesiayo , la ' Puka ralamni de e rhorat targa Yesaya lirni la ' a A ' u niwra , Hota riy rhi ' A ' pua emeka mak kpera-kdaitia deulu-tatra id A ' u . Ne hota Alier la hare honona maka e rhorat targa . Meman nek la hya ' ed maka ha rhorat tar lia ' Puka ralamni pa rakot nohor A ' u , de hota itamkek memna la dodo'ondi .
They said , Lord , behold , here are two swords . He said to them , That is enough . ||| Maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re riwra , Matroma , wehla ya'ara worg erti ! Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hare nek wa !
He came out and went , as his custom was , to the Mount of Olives . His disciples also followed him . ||| Noma Yesus Nhoitio'or la Yerusalem pa Nla'awa wo'ora Saitun emeknekama lera-lera Ha Nhi ' a . Ne maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re mana rarian nohor walia E wa .
When he was at the place , he said to them , Pray that you do n't enter into temptation . ||| La'pa rte'ela hande , noma Nakot la re Niwra , Msiumbaini totpena yana hegana amlawanni nreh nian miy pia mlier la do ' a-hala ralamni .
He was withdrawn from them about a stone 's throw , and he knelt down and prayed , ||| Nhorwua noma Enwatitni owa'an genni olietni edonna nhal de pera terampwolim rehenu , na'nama Nwaltior pa Nsumbaini .
saying , Father , if you are willing , remove this cup from me . Nevertheless , not my will , but yours , be done . ||| Npol lia Uplerlawna Niwra , Am ee ! Awuak pa Ompuayow de , Muhal doinia kropna-krieutu mak hota Atiutulu-lielew niana ri . Mere yana Mliernohor maka A ralmu ha nwaka mere plolli nek tiy O'owa Ama !
An angel from heaven appeared to him , strengthening him . ||| Dewade Uplerlawna hopopanni ida nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nmai pia na'itar la rurni-laini .
Being in agony , he prayed more earnestly . His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down on the ground . ||| Yesus ralamni nmayo ' a-nmataw dioin la pa nhi'nande Narur lia sniumbaini . Liwatnu nadwia ' i la tani , de emeknekama rara .
When he rose up from his prayer , he came to the disciples and found them sleeping because of grief , ||| La'pa Nsumbain pa nhorwua , noma Nawal pia Nla Ntomar la mutwualli re , mere Nla ' de wotelu e ranin hala , yoma ralamni rmolu-rhelam doin la .
and said to them , Why do you sleep ? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation . ||| Noma Npol lia re pa Nakot la , Nihya'pa mininmi ? ! Mimat pa msiumbaini totpena yana hegana amlawanni nreh nian miy pia mlier la do ' a-hala ralamni !
While he was still speaking , a crowd appeared . He who was called Judas , one of the twelve , was leading them . He came near to Jesus to kiss him . ||| La'pa Yesus entepartar mua'ta la yaltieri , dewade plinu-plinnianama riy lidan lawna ida nmai wia . Ramkek la lidan lawan de , ir mutwualli Yudas ed mak klidan nana re . Yudas de riy id la maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani woru re inhatti ! Rmai pia rwakrian wia noma Yudas la ' pa nkinnia Yesus .
But Jesus said to him , Judas , do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss ? ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Yudas Niwra , O e mniairia kinin de pa mu'olga Rimormior A'na A ' dina , Yudasa ? !
When those who were around him saw what was about to happen , they said to him , Lord , shall we strike with the sword ? ||| La'pa maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramkek memna hihi ' a-yapyap miaka hota ha rhi ' a re noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Matroma , amtemna wehla rilla pa amdawar wen ira ?
A certain one of them struck the servant of the high priest , and cut off his right ear . ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a ida nleh dioinia wehlani pa ndawar doinia riy ida tlinni walli malganna . Riy de nhi ' hopopna la imam-imam re o'ta lawanni .
But Jesus answered , Let me at least do this-and he touched his ear and healed him . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hadewa la hihi ' a-yapyap miak emkade ! Noma Nteman la hopopan de tlinni dewade tlinni nkalwiedweda la ' genni .
Jesus said to the chief priests , captains of the temple , and elders , who had come against him , Have you come out as against a robber , with swords and clubs ? ||| La'pa nhor nioma Yesus Nakot la imam-imam re o'tani-matni re rora mak katiaka roma krei o'tani-matni me Yahudi in letni-am letni mak kmai pia riwra rtorna Yesus la hande , Niwra , Hoi ! Hya ' nrei pia miodia wehla ara me kakaklu ma mtiorn A ' u ? ! Yanpa la ' miy wniarormi de A ' di de riy yatyata-halala id A ' u ? !
When I was with you in the temple daily , you did n't stretch out your hands against me . But this is your hour , and the power of darkness . ||| La ' lera-ler nek de A ' g e gor miy pia it rewre'wa la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini , mere miy edonna mtiorn A ' u . Mere la ' dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Nhur niohor miy pa mliernohora miy ralma-rior yatyatmi de , yoma ler di ed maka Uplerlawna Nhur niohora hegana amlawanni mak kar lia melmelli-kalkalamni pa nodi plolli .
They seized him and led him away , and brought him into the high priest 's house . But Peter followed from a distance . ||| Dewade rtorna Yesus pa rodia la imam-imam o'ta lawanni romni . Ne Petrus nlernohor reria mere edon nwakrian lia .
When they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and had sat down together , Peter sat among them . ||| La'pa rte'ela hande noma rhokla ai lia rom de herni-gaini letgarni noma ramtatna pa ramriri ai , noma Petrus nla ' pa namtatan wutga pa nre'ela namrir wutga ai lia riy mak kden la hande .
A certain servant girl saw him as he sat in the light , and looking intently at him , said , This man also was with him . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne pat mak khoi-ktani ida namkek nana Petrus namtatan la ' ai onni noma namkek tertehra na'nama nakot la niwra , Riy di nhi'inde nor Yesus rala ' wutu !
He denied Jesus , saying , Woman , I do n't know him . ||| Mere Petrus nrehera , niwra , Eee ! A ' niek de uplinu-uplo ' nohora riy de !
After a little while someone else saw him and said , You also are one of them ! But Peter answered , Man , I am not ! ||| La'pa edon nalo'on wali ne riy id owa'ana namkek nan Petrus na'nama nakot la Petrus niwra , Emeknekama dodo'ona o e muor walia Yesus talla . Mere Petrus nwalolla niwra , Edonna , A ' g edonna !
After about one hour passed , another confidently affirmed , saying , Truly this man also was with him , for he is a Galilean ! ||| Edonna nhal de jama id owa'an ne riy id owa'an nakot la niwra , Plol toto ' a riy di de ed maka nhi'inde kora Yesus talla , yoma riy Galilea eda de .
But Peter said , Man , I do n't know what you are talking about ! Immediately , while he was still speaking , a rooster crowed . ||| Mere Petrus nwalolla niwra , A ' g e uplin niohora hya ' a maka mukota re ! Pa la'pa Petrusa naltiertier mia'ta , de edon nalo'on wali ne hiwi lallu nkukule'ewa .
The Lord turned and looked at Peter . Then Peter remembered the Lord 's word , how he said to him , Before the rooster crows you will deny me three times . ||| Noma Yesus mana Nakillia Petrus handedena . Noma Petrus nhioratni nko ' i nana Itmatromni lirni la e ' a , Niwra , Hota hiwi lallu edonna nkukule ' ma'ta , la ler di de o ' e mrieher nan olek A lia re'eni wotel wua .
He went out , and wept bitterly . ||| Noma Petrus nlergot la gen die na'nama nahedge'du la kniakru .
The men who held Jesus mocked him and beat him . ||| Riy maka katiaka Yesus , rahe ' i-ramali Yesus me ramuki-rama'ala .
Having blindfolded him , they struck him on the face and asked him , Prophesy ! Who is the one who struck you ? ||| Rtutwu apitga Yesus matni na'nama rakot la riwra , Makwohorulu-ktatrulu O ' a , pa Mpuet tek la he ' ed maka kdupla O ' a dena !
They spoke many other things against him , insulting him . ||| Ral neka lira-tunu yahe ' i-yamali pa ra rwohora-rtatra Yesus .
As soon as it was day , the assembly of the elders of the people were gathered together , both chief priests and scribes , and they led him away into their council , saying , ||| La'pa yawyawar ma'ta de Yahudi in letni-am letni rora imam-imam o'tani-matni me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re rawok pa retlia Yesus lirni-tunnu . Noma mak katiaka Yesus rlidan nana E ' pa rodia la maketlia agama lira-tunu re gaini ralamni .
If you are the Christ , tell us . But he said to them , If I tell you , you wo n't believe , ||| Rakot la Yesus riwra , Mpualol tek la mai ami . Hota O ' di de Ray Makamori-Kalewna O ' a maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru ? Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La'pa A'ukot ho ' a mana hota miy edonna mpiesiay A ' u .
and if I ask , you will in no way answer me or let me go . ||| Ne la'pa A'utian miy ho'mana , hota miy edonna mpiet nana .
From now on , the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God . ||| Mere hota edon nalo'on wali ne Rimormiori A'na A ' die hota umtatan la ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu , de walli malganna pa Agor Uplerlawna Modi plolli .
They all said , Are you then the Son of God ? He said to them , You say it , because I am . ||| Noma honona ratian Yesus riwra , Hade emkade O ' di de Uplerlawna A'nani toto ' O ' a ? Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , Inhatta ! Mimpiet nan oleka wa .
They said , Why do we need any more witness ? For we ourselves have heard from his own mouth ! ||| Dewade riwra , Yana itwahak owa'an mak ktutrier saksi niohora lira-tunu ri . E lirni nek de nwaghal olek E inon wamueheni !
The whole company of them rose up and brought him before Pilate . ||| Noma mak kdena re honona raprir pia rodia Yesus la Pilatus de .
They began to accuse him , saying , We found this man perverting the nation , forbidding paying taxes to Caesar , and saying that he himself is Christ , a king . ||| La'pa rte'ela Pilatus gaini na'nama honona rto'on reria Yesus pa rakot la riwra , Ama , amlernan oleka la ' riy di de Nodia lima-rora masyarakat la talla klierta ralamni yoma Entot ir pa rmalawna hairi Romawi . E ' ed maka khi ' a rira pa yana rpairia blasten la ' a mak ktorna horta-hairi Romawi me Eniwra E ' de ray ida E ' a , maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna E rimormiorni .
Pilate asked him , Are you the King of the Jews ? He answered him , So you say . ||| Noma Pilatus natiana Yesus niwra , Plola O ' di de ray Yahudi id O ' a ? Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , Emek lir mak omukot de !
Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes , I find no basis for a charge against this man . ||| Dewade Pilatus nakot la imam-imam o'tani-matni re rora riy mak kden la hande honona niwra , A ' g edonna liernan etia hala kuku ' la ' a riy di totpena nlernana niukmu .
But they insisted , saying , He stirs up the people , teaching throughout all Judea , beginning from Galilee even to this place . ||| Mere riy rariahu re edonna rwadura ne ramera-ramer matni pa riwra , Wniatutnu-wniaye'eni de e nwewr olek la ' a Yudea pa nareiniande riy kokokna-rariarni . Enwag ulga la Galilea dewade Nhi ' owa'ana la Yudea pa dodo'ondi Nmai meman la handi !
But when Pilate heard Galilee mentioned , he asked if the man was a Galilean . ||| La'pa Pilatus natlin nan Yesus Nwatiawu Galilea , noma natiana niwra , O ! Hota riy di de makden Galilea eda di ?
When he found out that he was in Herod 's jurisdiction , he sent him to Herod , who was also in Jerusalem during those days . ||| La'pa rakota riwra Yesus de ha Nwatiawua leta-ruhuna maka Herodes nodi plolli la , dewade Pilatus nhopan pa rodia la Herodes de . La ' lera de mana Herodes ed walia la Yerusalem .
Now when Herod saw Jesus , he was exceedingly glad , for he had wanted to see him for a long time , because he had heard many things about him . He hoped to see some miracle done by him . ||| Noma Herodes la'pa matni namkek nana Yesus dewade nahepur wenna yoma la ' mahnek memna ralamni nwakwak de pa enor rwatroma . E wakwakni de totpena Yesus Ntutga hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona pa enamkek memna , yoma enatlin olek la ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka nhi'inde Ha Nhi ' nan de .
He questioned him with many words , but he gave no answers . ||| Noma Herodes natian la ' a-maiya . Mere Yesus Nherieri tio'owa .
The chief priests and the scribes stood , vehemently accusing him . ||| Imam-imam re o'tani-matni rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama re , pa honona rewre'wa rtutrier lia hande pa rotil reria hala la Yesus de rkamota-rkama'ara .
Herod with his soldiers humiliated him and mocked him . Dressing him in luxurious clothing , they sent him back to Pilate . ||| Dewade Herodes nora makodi keki-rautu mak katiak Herodes rod lia ' a-rod miai Yesus la yahe ' i-yamali . Rohoga rain plalahwa la Yesus pa emeka ray-ray naniayarni , nhor nioma ra'enyatg owa'ana la ' a Pilatus .
Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very day , for before that they were enemies with each other . ||| La ululu de Herodes nora Pilatus emeknekama pat eriariai mere la ' ler de meman pa rwali owa'an la emeknekama am nora hyalli .
Pilate called together the chief priests , the rulers , and the people , ||| Pilatus nawoka-nale'ga imam-imam o'tani-matni , in letni-am letni ror wut nieka lima-rora honona .
and said to them , You brought this man to me as one that perverts the people , and behold , having examined him before you , I found no basis for a charge against this man concerning those things of which you accuse him . ||| Na'nama nakot la re niwra , Mimiottiarga Hadi pa Nmai a ' die me miwra E ' ed maka khi ' pa rirahu rmalawna horta-hairi Roma . Pa la'pa dodo'ondi de a'utian momuog olekwa la miy gaimi ralamni . Mere hala id mana a ' g edonna liernana emeka mikot olek la mai a ' u .
Neither has Herod , for I sent you to him , and see , nothing worthy of death has been done by him . ||| Hade emekwalima Herodes ralma-riorni , yoma Herodes nek de na'enyat owa'an pa nmai it di . Tamkek nan memna la ' riy di , de edonna nhi ' nana hadom de npa'eini-npahala totpena rukum penna .
I will therefore chastise him and release him . ||| La ' hade pede hota aliwra nanpena agolin doinia la .
Now he had to release one prisoner to them at the feast . ||| Yoma nhi'inde la ' a lerlalawna Paska Pilatus nollia riy Yahudi maka ha rukmu re id la la ' pa nler la lima-rora .
But they all cried out together , saying , Away with this man ! Release to us Barabbas ! - ||| Dewade riy honona maka kden la hande riarin tar lia nhiaunu riwra , Rwenna Yesus de ! Ne muolin doin Barabas la !
one who was thrown into prison for a certain revolt in the city , and for murder . ||| Barabas di de ed maka e rho'la taru la roma nhio'la yoma narieiniande riy rmalawna horta-hairi Romawi la ' a kokokna-rariarni la leta ralamni la'pa nwunu-nwenna rimormiori .
Then Pilate spoke to them again , wanting to release Jesus , ||| Mere Pilatus niwra nolin doinia Yesus . La hade pede nakot owa'an hade la riy honona re .
but they shouted , saying , Crucify ! Crucify him ! ||| Mere rhaun-rhaun pa riwra , Rla rwair neka wa ! Rla rwairia la auwlakra hananni !
He said to them the third time , Why ? What evil has this man done ? I have found no capital crime in him . I will therefore chastise him and release him . ||| Pilatus nakot lira re'eni wotellu de niwra , Mere halli hya ' a pede ? A ' g edonna liernana do ' a-hal maka kariei pia totpena rukum penna di ! Pede hota aliwar nek wa nanpena agolin doinia la .
But they were urgent with loud voices , asking that he might be crucified . Their voices and the voices of the chief priests prevailed . ||| Mere honona edonna rwayow o'tani . Rhaun-rhaun matmiati pa riwra , Rla rwairia , rla rwairia la auwlakra hananni ! Pa la'awa hohoni dewade mak khaunu re ra'unut wa .
Pilate decreed that what they asked for should be done . ||| Pede Pilatus natrernia niukum matmiati la Yesus , yoma riy honona wakwakni inhatta .
He released him who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder , for whom they asked , but he delivered Jesus up to their will . ||| Ne Pilatus nolin doinia Barabas maka ha rwaka , kennama e ' ed maka ha rho'la taru yoma nhi ' kokokna-rariarni ne nwunu-nwenna rimormiori . Mere Pilatus nala Yesus la ira totpa rodia la'pa plolli nek la ira wniahi'ini wa .
When they led him away , they grabbed one Simon of Cyrene , coming from the country , and laid the cross on him to carry it after Jesus . ||| Noma ra'ala Yesus pa rodi rla'awa . Rla ' noma rwatrom nana riy Kirene ida , nwawa Simona la ' talan letgara pa niwa nla'awa la ' letlawna Yerusalem . Dewade rte'la la Simon na'nama rtekua pa nre'ela nakwara auwlakar de pa nlernohor reri Yesus .
A great multitude of the people followed him , including women who also mourned and lamented him . ||| Rirahu rlernohor reria Yesus pa rala ' wutu . Me la ' lidan lawan de , patke ' a doma e ror wali pa koko ' a-herer nohora Yesus .
But Jesus , turning to them , said , Daughters of Jerusalem , do n't weep for me , but weep for yourselves and for your children . ||| Mere Yesus Nkillia na'nama Nakot la re Niwra , Pat Yerusalem miy re yana mkiakur nohora A ' u . Mkiakur nohor neka miora upmi-a'nami .
For behold , the days are coming in which they will say , ‘ Blessed are the barren , the wombs that never bore , and the breasts that never nursed . ' ||| Yoma hota nte'ela la ' lerni de riy riwra , Adoh ! Patke ' mak kakleha upa-a'na re ra'unut matmiati ee !
Then they will begin to tell the mountains , ‘ Fall on us ! ' and tell the hills , ‘ Cover us . ' ||| La ' ler de mana hota riy rakot la wo'ora re riwra , Wo'ormi re mtiuin pa miutin wen ami , me rakot wali la ' a wo'or kuke ' a re riwra , Mia mpiupun wen ami ee !
For if they do these things in the green tree , what will be done in the dry ? ||| Yoma la'pa riy rhi ' emkadi mai A ' u mak kakleha do ' a-hala de , hya ' ho ' a ha rhi ' a la ' riy dodo ' a-halal miy re ! A ' die nek de emeknekama ora-au muaka kmormior mia'ta pa ai edon na'an doinia la . Mere miy miaka khi ' a-kyapi do ' a-hal miy re hota emolannekama ora-au muaka kerna-khag olekwa pa rhoplial walia la ai mormiori ralamni de nram doin momuoga la !
There were also others , two criminals , led with him to be put to death . ||| La hande mana hota rod wialia riy yatyata worg maka e riwra rla rukum penna nohor wali Yesus .
When they came to the place that is called The Skull , they crucified him there with the criminals , one on the right and the other on the left . ||| La'pa rte'ela gen miaka ha rweta la Riy Ruri-Kliaklu Genni , dewade rla rwairia Yesus la auwlakar hananni me rla rwairia riy maroro ' a re , id la malganna , id la malwiru ne Yesus Nden la letgara .
Jesus said , Father , forgive them , for they do n't know what they are doing . Dividing his garments among them , they cast lots . ||| Noma Yesus Nsumbain la Niwra , Amee ! Yana mtio'ona harilla ' do'oni-halli wawannu , yoma hari e raplin niohor ma'ta hya ' maka ha rhi ' a re ee ! Noma rdurmu-rhakra Yesus naniayarni de rnairia patui undi .
The people stood watching . The rulers with them also scoffed at him , saying , He saved others . Let him save himself , if this is the Christ of God , his chosen one ! ||| Rirahu mak ktutrier lia hande ramkek momuoga . Yahudi o'tani-matni nek de mana ertepartarlia rwali-rwalliohora Yesus pa riwra , Hota la'pa plola la Enhi ' a Ray Makamori-Kalewna , maka Uplerlawna orgahani Nwalir niana , de tamkek teka hota Nodi plolli pa Nalewna E inon wamueheni pa emeknekama Enamori-nalewn oleka riy meheni ?
The soldiers also mocked him , coming to him and offering him vinegar , ||| Makodi keki-rautu re mana rre ' wal pia rwali-rwalliohora Yesus . Rmai pia riwra rala anggur turnu mak milmilu la Yesus .
and saying , If you are the King of the Jews , save yourself ! ||| Noma rakot la , La'pa O ' di de riy Yahudi Rayni id O ' a , de Mulewan teka inon wamuehemu .
An inscription was also written over him in letters of Greek , Latin , and Hebrew , THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS . ||| La ' a auwlakra walli heyanna , la Yesus o'tani de e rhorat targa , Yahudi Rayni inhatti .
One of the criminals who was hanged insulted him , saying , If you are the Christ , save yourself and us ! ||| Riy yatyat id mak kden la auwlakra hananni de nre ' wal pia napolu-naliella Yesus pa niwra , O ' di de Ray Makamori-Kalewn id O ' a , pa Mulewan teka O muor ami !
But the other answered , and rebuking him said , Do n't you even fear God , seeing you are under the same condemnation ? ||| Mere riy yatyat mak handina de npolliohora mutwualli de niwra , Hoi ! O ' nek de e rukum temna la E ' a ne hota o ' mana muati wial wia . Ne o ' edonna mumta'ata Uplerlawna niukamnu ? !
And we indeed justly , for we receive the due reward for our deeds , but this man has done nothing wrong . ||| Itro ' a tlernana niukum di mak lol talanni yoma la ' a itro ' a do'oni-halli mak kariei . Mere E ' de Nakleh do ' a-hala kuku ' a .
He said to Jesus , Lord , remember me when you come into your Kingdom . ||| Noma nakot la Yesus niwra , Yesus , Mhuoratreri a ' u la'pa Omhi ' a Ray mak ktorna-krautu lodanmu-hairmu .
Jesus said to him , Assuredly I tell you , today you will be with me in Paradise . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Mpuesiayo , ler di meman pa omuor rewre'wa A lia Firdaus .
It was now about the sixth hour , and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour . ||| Edonna nhal de la'pa lera nwawuau ro'onni jam termida wehrani woru mere la ' a noh de tetema nekpa mel'uta-maliena nodia pa lera nher miemna jam wotellu
The sun was darkened , and the veil of the temple was torn in two . ||| yoma lera edonna nhita-nrepra . Noma plin-plinnianamde kok lawna maka ha ra rahew tiarga liolgeni la ' a gen mak kmou-kwitna la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni totpa riy edon rler la rialma , de ema rlihirwah ' a la woru .
Jesus , crying with a loud voice , said , Father , into your hands I commit my spirit ! Having said this , he breathed his last . ||| Dewade Yesus Nhaun matmiat pia Niwra , Am ee ! Aghoiya A ino'nu pa Mkienia la limmu rora ralamni ! La'pa Naltier pia nhorwua noma Nmat wia .
When the centurion saw what was done , he glorified God , saying , Certainly this was a righteous man . ||| La'pa makhi ' o'tani la lidna makodi keki-rautu , mak katiak reri Yesus de , namkek memna hare honona dewade na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna pa niwra , Plol toto ' a la Ha Nakleh do ' a-hala !
All the multitudes that came together to see this , when they saw the things that were done , returned home beating their chests . ||| La'pa rirahu mak kawok la hande ramkek momuoga hare honona dewade honona rla'awa de ralamni rmolu-rhelam doin la .
All his acquaintances and the women who followed with him from Galilee stood at a distance , watching these things . ||| Mere Yesus loiwialli-talanwalli re honona , me la ' walia a'na pat maka kwatiawua Galilea pa klernohor E ' a , rtutrier niek la oliet pa ramkek momuoga hare honona .
Behold , there was a man named Joseph , who was a member of the council , a good and righteous man he had not consented to their counsel and deed , from Arimathaea , a city of the Jews , who was also waiting for God 's Kingdom . ||| Noma riy id la hande de nanni Yusup . E ' de riy mak kwatiawua leta Arimatea la ' a Yudea . E ' de riy samomuou ida , mak kden la plol wawna la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Ne nhi'inde ralamni nod rer lia wniei la Uplerlawna hota Nwalia Ray id pa Nma Ntorna lodna-hairi . E ' mana nhi'inde nre ' wal pia nla ' a riy maketlia lira-tunu la agama hanni , mere la ' ler de e edonna nre ' pa nwayow nohora maketlia lira-tunu re lirni pa rwenna Yesus .
This man went to Pilate , and asked for Jesus ' body . ||| Noma Yusup di nla ' pa nwak la Pilatus totpena na'ala Yesus inonni mak kmati olek de .
He took it down and wrapped it in a linen cloth , and laid him in a tomb that was cut in stone , where no one had ever been laid . ||| Nhor nia'nama nla nalernia Yesus mak kmati olek della la ' a auwlakra hananni . Na'nama nala kok lawan wawahra mak kamnurnuhru na ntomna . Nhor nia'nama nla nle'er targa la ' a ketar maka ha rawte'ta nana . Hoi-kietar de edonna rnairi et mia'ta la ' a mati doma .
It was the day of the Preparation , and the Sabbath was drawing near . ||| La ler de , ler maka rwahi ' targa hare honona pa rwei-rnara Sabat lerni ler maka Yahudi re edon rkar lia , yoma nhi ' kuku ' owa'an de Sabat de ntutu-nte'ewa .
The women who had come with him out of Galilee followed after , and saw the tomb and how his body was laid . ||| La ' ler de de a'na pat mak kwatiawua Galilea pa klernohora Yesus rmai pia rlernohora Yusup totpena ramkek memna hota nle'er targa Yesus la ' hoi-kietra meni ralamni .
They returned and prepared spices and ointments . On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment . ||| Nhorwua noma rla'awa pa rwahi ' a-rwayod tiarga wu'ru mak kahuwu mikmikri totpena rma rawu'ru-ragania Yesus mak kmati olek de wa . Mere la'pa nte'ela la ' a Sabat lerni maka Yahudi edon rkar lia , dewade honona re rrena pleini , yoma rlernohora agama deullu-tatarni lirni .
But on the first day of the week , at early dawn , they and some others came to the tomb , bringing the spices which they had prepared . ||| La'pa yawyawar ma'ta la krei lerni dewade a'na patke ' a re rodia wu'ru mak kahuwu mikmikri re pa rla ' a lien maka ha rkenia Yesus inonni , totpena riwra rla rawu'ru-ragania Yesus maka nietra olek la ' a hoi ralamni de .
They found the stone rolled away from the tomb . ||| Rla pa rwakriania hoi die onni dewade ramkek de wat liawan maka ha ra rherit targa hoi die nhiarni ema rwaklol dioin oleka wa .
They entered in , and did n't find the Lord Jesus ' body . ||| Dewade rodi liarni pa rler la tiamin mat gen die ralamni , mere edonna ramkek nana Itmatromlawanni Yesus inonni , mak kmati olek de wa la ' hande .
While they were greatly perplexed about this , behold , two men stood by them in dazzling clothing . ||| Rtutrier die rmeh ' a rahihi ' a la genni yoma wniarorni la maka ha rwahaka de . Noma plinu-plinnianama riy woru rlipa-rka'ma nohora naniayarni pa rtutrier wiut lia ira .
Becoming terrified , they bowed their faces down to the earth . The men said to them , Why do you seek the living among the dead ? ||| Ir rheduma , ne rwaltiora-rwaltieman tar lia la ' a riy maroro ' a re gaini ralamni . Mere riy maroro ' a re rakot la ira riwra , Hya ' nrei pia mpiahaka riy mak kmormiori la ' a riy mak kmati re wokni-le'enu ? !
He is n't here , but is risen . Remember what he told you when he was still in Galilee , ||| Mak ha mihak de edonna Nden olek la handi wa yoma Nmori olekwa ! Yanpa mhioratdoinia E nnio'oni mak kakot nohora hota Nmori owa'ana . Enakot nohora hade tiy miy la ' ler maka miora mdien ma'ta la ' Galilea .
saying that the Son of Man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men and be crucified , and the third day rise again ? ||| E lirni la ' ler de de Niwra hota Rimormiori A'na de rala la ' a riy mak penpuen lia do ' a-hala , totpena rla rwair wenna . Mere la'pa nodia ler wotellu de hota Nmori owa'ana .
They remembered his words , ||| Dewade a'na patke ' a re nhioratni nla'awa temni la ' a nnio ' de .
returned from the tomb , and told all these things to the eleven and to all the rest . ||| La'pa rpolan wa , noma rakot momuoga hya ' maka ha ramkeka rella ' maka rlernohor reria Yesus re termida wehrani ida re ror wutga maklernohor reri re honona .
Now they were Mary Magdalene , Joanna , and Mary the mother of James . The other women with them told these things to the apostles . ||| A'na pat maka kodia kot de la ' a makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu re rora riy korni , de Maria Magdalena , Yohana , Yakowsi inni Maria , me la ' walia a'na patke ' a dom pali mak kor ir talla .
These words seemed to them to be nonsense , and they did n't believe them . ||| La'pa makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu re rora riy korni ratlin nana patke ' a re lirni mere lirni re edon rla ' nana ira ralma-riorni pede edonna rpesiaya re .
But Peter got up and ran to the tomb . Stooping and looking in , he saw the strips of linen lying by themselves , and he departed to his home , wondering what had happened . ||| Mere Petrus nleretniekla namat pa nawlar lia ' a hoi-kietar de , la ' noma nru ' pua namkek la lien de ralamni , ne namkek nan to ' a kok lawan wawahra de . Dewade nawal wia de nwarora-nwalai nieka hya ' a maka ha rhi ' oleka re wa .
Behold , two of them were going that very day to a village named Emmaus , which was sixty stadia from Jerusalem . ||| La ' ler de nekpa maklernohor reria Yesus riy woru , ralala ' rer pia riwra rla ' a let maka kwawa Emaus . Let de olietni la ' a Yerusalema , la'pa edonna nhal de yala ' nana kilu termida wehrani ida .
They talked with each other about all of these things which had happened . ||| La ' talla plahwani de e rwahagaur nohora la ' a hya ' maka ha ramkek oleka re wa la ' a Yesus matmiatni .
While they talked and questioned together , Jesus himself came near , and went with them . ||| La'pa rwahaur reri ne idma nal ralma-rior la ida , dewade Yesus Nmeh ' a Nma Nala ' wut lia irrora .
But their eyes were kept from recognizing him . ||| Ramkek rer toto ' a Yesus , mere la ' a Uplerlawna hihi'ini pede nhioratni re emeka ha kniukmu la ' a Yesus eda de .
He said to them , What are you talking about as you walk , and are sad ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hya ' ed maka ha mpiahaur lolola rina ? Noma rrora rtut tiaru de , gaini nmalui dioin la .
One of them , named Cleopas , answered him , Are you the only stranger in Jerusalem who does n't know the things which have happened there in these days ? ||| Dewade mak kwawa Ekliopsa natiana Yesus niwra , Ama , yanpa O ' de do'ona-dakna id memeh ' a la ' a Yerusalem di maka kaplin nohora hya ' maka ha rhi ' la ' a melul diena ? !
He said to them , What things ? They said to him , The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene , who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people , ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Hya ' ed mak ha rhi ' nana la Yerusalem de ? Rrora riwra , O e muplin niohora hya ' maka ha rhi ' a la Yesus riy Nasaret de ? Makwohorulu-ktatrulu id eda de , Ntutga plolli-mneheni la ' a wniatutu-wniaye ' a me hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat . Ne nhiolli-lietni de edonna nhala la ' a Uplerlawna nor riy honona yamkekni .
and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death , and crucified him . ||| Imam-imam o'tani-matni , me mak kodi plolli la mai ami rala pa rukum penna la ' a auwlakra hananni .
But we were hoping that it was he who would redeem Israel . Yes , and besides all this , it is now the third day since these things happened . ||| Mere la'pa edon rwunu-rwen ma't E ' a de ami e mha'ar a aran mamni la E ' a totpa E ' ed maka kwe'er doin luwu-a'na Israel it la kokgohonu . Ne rerehniana la ' ler di lera wotellu la ' a maka ha rwunu-rwenna Yesus mere Uplerlawna edonna Namori-nalewn luwu-a'na Israel ma'ta .
Also , certain women of our company amazed us , having arrived early at the tomb , ||| A kniarwial miamni a'na patke ' a wo'ira mana e rhi ' a pa amheduma yoma yawyawar ma'ta de rla ' a hoi wawannu
and when they did n't find his body , they came saying that they had also seen a vision of angels , who said that he was alive . ||| mere edonna rlernana inonni maka ha rle'er targa la hande . Pede rawal pia e rwahaur nohora de ir rlernan to ' a Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu doma . Ne hopopna re riwra Yesus Nmori olekwa .
Some of us went to the tomb and found it just like the women had said , but they did n't see him . ||| Ne a mutwual miamni riy wo'ira rla ' a , pa ramkek olek walia de plola la a'na patke ' a re lirni , mere eneknek to'ama Yesus nampena edonna ramkek nana .
He said to them , Foolish people , and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken ! ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Miy podakmi nee ! Miy edon mimpiesiaya makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni-tunnu .
Did n't the Christ have to suffer these things and to enter into his glory ? ||| Hota plol toto ' meman de Makamori-Kalewan de Nler la kropanni-krieutnu ri pa Nmati , nampena Nmori owa'ana me Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi yoma Uplerlawna lirni mak makwohorulu-ktatrulu rakot targa emkade toh ? !
Beginning from Moses and from all the prophets , he explained to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself . ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot nohora ir la ' a hya ' maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni la ' a E hihi'ini-yapyapni , nwaga la Musa Pukni ralamni , me la ' walia makwohorulu-ktatrulu korni Pukni ha rakotkota .
They came near to the village where they were going , and he acted like he would go further . ||| La'pa rwakriarian liolol wa la ' a let maka ha ra'oin nan de . Dewade Yesus Ntot pa Nodi liarni .
They urged him , saying , Stay with us , for it is almost evening , and the day is almost over . He went in to stay with them . ||| Mere rrora rwakwak Yesus pa Nwarini plein riwra , Ama , twarini pleini , yoma ler ntuini olekwa ne mela ndamit nan O wa , pa tanin nek wa . Pede Yesus Nod niohora re pa rwarin lia mel de .
When he had sat down at the table with them , he took the bread and gave thanks . Breaking it , he gave it to them . ||| La'pa riwra ra'an wut lia mei wawannu , dewade Yesus Na'ala roti na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna na'nama Nhawi-nhawia pa Nala la ira .
Their eyes were opened and they recognized him , then he vanished out of their sight . ||| Dewade rrora matni ema rwe'er doinia pa ratga Yesus eda de ! Mere Nleretniekla ema Nwatlen nana .
They said to one another , Were n't our hearts burning within us while he spoke to us along the way , and while he opened the Scriptures to us ? ||| Noma idma nakot la ida , La'pa emkameni ho'mana lir maka Ha Nwahaur nohora mai it la ' talan letgar de me maka Enakot nohora Puka lirni mai ita nhi ' it pa it ralamni nahepuepru !
They rose up that very hour , returned to Jerusalem , and found the eleven gathered together , and those who were with them , ||| La ' a mtatande nekpa radil doin meman pa rawal lia ' Yerusalem . La'pa rte'ewa , de rlernana mdudud niana maklernohor reria Yesus riy termida wehrani ida re e ror walia maklernohor reria Yesus korni dom pa e rawok taru .
saying , The Lord is risen indeed , and has appeared to Simon ! ||| Noma rleretniekla mak kawok taru re rakot la riy maroro ' a re pa riwra , Ee ! Plola ! Itmatromni Nmormior owa'ana ! Entutg oleka inonni la Simon Petrus !
They related the things that happened along the way , and how he was recognized by them in the breaking of the bread . ||| Dewade maklernohor reria Yesus riy maroro ' a re wal pia rwahaur nohora hya ' maka ha ramkek la ' a talan letgara , me emkameni la irat niohora Yesus de la'pa na'nama Ntepartarlia Nlihira-nhawia roti la ir gaini ralamni .
As they said these things , Jesus himself stood among them , and said to them , Peace be to you . ||| La'pa rtepartar mua'ta la wniahauru , dewade plinu-plinnianama Yesus Nmeh ' Ntutrier lia ira letgara-mneneheni na'nama Nwak kalwieda la ir honona Niwra , Awuak pa Uplerlawna Nala kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy !
But they were terrified and filled with fear , and supposed that they had seen a spirit . ||| Honona re rhedu hmuakmuakur pa ramta'ata , yoma ratniekame yanpa mati lianu bontiana hantu .
He said to them , Why are you troubled ? Why do doubts arise in your hearts ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Nihya'pa mimta'ata me miy ralammi worwuorga ? !
See my hands and my feet , that it is truly me . Touch me and see , for a spirit does n't have flesh and bones , as you see that I have . ||| Mimkek la A li'mu-la'ku ri totpena miatga A ' orgah ' u inhatti . Mhiai tek la A ino'nu , yoma mati lianu rakleh ruri-kliaklu , emeka A ino'nu di !
When he had said this , he showed them his hands and his feet . ||| Noma Ntutga limni-lakni la ' ir honona .
While they still did n't believe for joy , and wondered , he said to them , Do you have anything here to eat ? ||| Ne irahepuepru mere rwer rer mia'ta wawni pede emeknekama ir edonna rpesiay toto ' ma'ta . Dewade Yesus Natiana re Niwra , Miy yamananmi etla ? Mial oke ' mai A ' u .
They gave him a piece of a broiled fish and some honeycomb . ||| Noma rala i'na tniunu tnieti id la .
He took them , and ate in front of them . ||| Yesus Na'ala i'n de na'nama Na'ana la ir gaini ralamni .
He said to them , This is what I told you while I was still with you , that all things which are written in the law of Moses , the prophets , and the psalms concerning me must be fulfilled . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , A'ukot oleka tiy miy wia la ' lera itden wut mua'ta la geni ida giwra hare honona mak ha rhorat targa la Puka Musa , onde Puka makwohorulu-ktatrulu me la ' a Puk Masmur ralamni mai A ' u de hare edonna rhala ne plol toto ' a pa rtutu-rte'ewa .
Then he opened their minds , that they might understand the Scriptures . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nharia ir ralma-riorni totpena rna'erit nana hya ' maka Yesus Nakot nohora Puka lirni .
He said to them , Thus it is written , and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day , ||| Nakot la re Niwra , La ' a Puka ralamni de e rhorat targa de , Ray Makamori-Kalewan de hota Nler la kropanni-krieutnu pa Nmati , me hota nleretniekla nodia owa'an lera wotellu pa Nmori owa'ana .
and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations , beginning at Jerusalem . ||| Ne hota maklernohor reri A ' u de rnairia A plola-mneh ' u pa rla rakot nohora la ' a rimormiori nohkerna wawannu la ' a hairi-hairi me noha-rai honona rpa rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioinia do'oni-halli totpena hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli re . Ne lir kalwied de rakot nohora de rwag ulga la ' a Yerusalem nanpena nwewar noheri woru-lyanti nayanni .
You are witnesses of these things . ||| Miy er mak kamkek memna A matmia'tu-mormio'ru pa mlia ' mikot nohora la ' meni-meni to'owa .
Behold , I send out the promise of my Father on you . But wait in the city of Jerusalem until you are clothed with power from on high . ||| Ne hota A ' mana pena u'enyatga Uplerlawna Nhiwni maka A A'mu Nano'targa tiy miy . Mere mpiei niek la ' let di , pa la'pa Uplerlawna Nala E rurni-laini tiy miy !
He led them out as far as Bethany , and he lifted up his hands and blessed them . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nodgiot ir pa rla ' a leta Betania onni . Rla'awa la hande noma Yesus Nran limni pa na Ntera-ndema re .
While he blessed them , he withdrew from them and was carried up into heaven . ||| La'pa Nran rer mia'ta limni pa na Ntera-ndema re dewade Narian pa Nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha , pa rmemeh ' a rtutrier lia hande .
They worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy , ||| Honona re rru ' u-rtowar la E ' a nhor nioma rawal lia Yerusalem de , ralamni rahepur memna .
and were continually in the temple , praising and blessing God . Amen . ||| Ne lera-lera nekpa e rawok tar lia Uplerlawna roma kreini pa ra'uli-rawed reria Uplerlawna .
In the beginning was the Word , and the Word was with God , and the Word was God . ||| Ululu meman la ' a noha-rai edonna nwo'ti-nhar mia'ta , de Yesus maka rweta la ' Uplerlawna Lira Nnio'oni-Wawa Niatnu de ed olek la wa . E ' de e Nor wutga Uplerlawna la ' lir ida , ne E ' wal pia Uplerlawna inhatta .
The same was in the beginning with God . ||| Ululu de Enor wut lia Uplerlawna pa
All things were made through him . Without him , nothing was made that has been made . ||| Ena'ohi-na'ara , Nakoki-nayap miemna haneknek wawannu mak kden la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni , Nlernohora Uplerlawna lirni .
In him was life , and the life was the light of men . ||| La ' a rimormiori noh keran di honona re de mormiorni onni-ga'arni nwatiawu E ' a ne la ' a mormiori-dardiari plollola inhat de pede rimormiori ramkek la lelerni .
The light shines in the darkness , and the darkness has n't overcome it . ||| E ' de rwet walia la ' a Lelerni de . Yoma E ' ed mak khi ' a repreparni la melmelli-kalkalamni ralamni , ne melmel de edonna nwarehi nana pa nkaduw nana Lelerni de .
There came a man sent from God , whose name was John . ||| Noma Uplerlawna Nhopan doinia riy ida de nwawa Yohansi
The same came as a witness , that he might testify about the light , that all might believe through him . ||| totpa nma nakot nohora Lelerni de yala'ani , me la ' a Yohansi lirni de pede riy honona rlernan talan pa rpesiaya .
He was not the light , but was sent that he might testify about the light . ||| Yohansi meman nek de Lelerni atia ' hade , eneknek to'ama e nma nakot nohora to ' a Lelerni de .
The true light that enlightens everyone was coming into the world . ||| Yoma Lelerni mak kaplola , de maka Nhita-nrepar nana rimormiori honona hota Nerun la nohkerna wawannu .
He was in the world , and the world was made through him , and the world did n't recognize him . ||| Enmai die pa ed olek la noha wawannu . Uplerlawna Na'ohi-na'ara nohkeran di de Nor wutga E ' a mere emkade ho'mana nohkeran di edon rwayow nohora E ' a .
He came to his own , and those who were his own did n't receive him . ||| E ' orgahi Nmai lia E let wamueheni mere E luwnu-a'nani harahu edonna rreinian E ' a .
But as many as received him , to them he gave the right to become God 's children , to those who believe in his name , ||| Mere he ' a-he ' maka e rreinian E ' pa rpesiaya de hota Enala rpa rre'ela Uplerlawna upni-a'nani .
who were born , not of blood , nor of the will of the flesh , nor of the will of man , but of God . ||| Ir edonna rwal lia Uplerlawna upni-a'nani de yoma rlernohora rimormiori nhioli emeka muanke ' id nor hawni ranina yoma wniarorni-wnialaini pa hota ha rayor nian keke'enku ' a ida . Yoma mormior warwuar die edon nwatiawua rimormiori mere ha nwatiawu meman la Uplerlawna .
The Word became flesh and lived among us . We saw his glory , such glory as of the only born Son of the Father , full of grace and truth . ||| E ' maka ha rweta la Uplerlawna Lirni la ' a rimormiori de E ' de Uplerlawna wali E ' a mere Nwali olek la rimormior pa Enden wut lia mai ita la ' noh keran di la ' ler ho'ke'eni , ne la ' ler de itamkek memn oleka E preheni-mkaini , de preheni-mkaini la Wutmueha-Laimieha mak kwatiawua Amlawanni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . La ' E ' pede it tat niohor memna hya ' ed mak kaplol la ' Uplerlawna , me tat niohora E ralam kalwiedni mak kareh mieman de mai ita .
John testified about him . He cried out , saying , This was he of whom I said , ‘ He who comes after me has surpassed me , for he was before me . ' ||| Noma lera ida ne Yohansi Nmai die nakot nohora E ' a , de nhar lirni pa niwra , Hadi ed mak a'ukot nohor oleka la ' miy , de agiwra hota Enmai die ntawli'ir mai a ' u , mere E tullu-petanni nareh dioin a ' u , yoma a i'nu edon nmor dioin ma'ta a ' u de E ' ed olek la wa .
From his fullness we all received grace upon grace . ||| E ' de npenpuen niohora kalwieda-paitiota . Ne la ' E ralam kalwiedni de pede E ' ed mak ktowr reria ra'ani-pallu pripanni-fa'anni mai ita .
For the law was given through Moses . Grace and truth were realized through Jesus Christ . ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a deullu-tatarni de itlernana la Musa . Mere itat niohora hya ' ed mak kaplol la ' Uplerlawna me la ' E ralam kalwiedni mak kareh mieman de mai ita yoma Yesus Kristus e Ntutga hade mai ita .
No one has seen God at any time . The only born Son , who is in the bosom of the Father , has declared him . ||| La riy id mana edonna ramkek ma'ta Uplerlawna , atiaru Uplerlawna A'nani , Wutmueha-Laimieha , mak kora Amni Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Ne Wutmueha-Laimieha de ed mak kalharia ktutga E Amni mai ita .
This is John 's testimony , when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him , Who are you ? ||| Yohansi nakot nohora inon wamueheni de emkadi , La ' ler ida ne in letni-am letni mak kodi plolli la Yahudi , mak kden la Yerusalem , rhopna imam-imam o'tani-matni pa rora riy makden Lewi rla ratiana Yohansi riwra , O ' di de he ' o ' a ?
He declared , and did n't deny , but he declared , I am not the Christ . ||| Noma Yohansi nakot eti-kriahaya niwra , A ' di de Ray mak kamori-kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru atia ' a ' u .
They asked him , What then ? Are you Elijah ? He said , I am not . Are you the prophet ? He answered , No . ||| Hade emkade de o di de he ' o ' a ? Yanpa makwohorulu-ktatrulu Elia o ' a ? Mere Yohansi niwra edonna . Yanpa Makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka ha rano'taru inhat o ' a ? Yohansi niwra edonan wali .
They said therefore to him , Who are you ? Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us . What do you say about yourself ? ||| Demade mukot teka la mai ami he ' o ' dina de ? Totpena amakot nohor o la ' a riy mak khopan pa ama matian o ' a .
He said , I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness , ‘ Make straight the way of the Lord , ' as Isaiah the prophet said . ||| Yohansi nakot la niwra , A ' di de riy mak kpolpuolu-khawaunu lola wo'orletna-kawurloini pa giwra , Mpiale'era Orgahi-Orha ' a loini-talanni . Hya ' ed maka Yohansi nakota de , de makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya lirni la ' a ululu memna .
The ones who had been sent were from the Pharisees . ||| Noma riy Parisi maka ha rhopan pa rma ratiana re
They asked him , Why then do you baptize if you are not the Christ , nor Elijah , nor the prophet ? ||| ratiana Yohansi riwra , La'pa o ' di de Ray Makamori-Kalewn atia ' o ' a , onde Elia atia ' o ' a ne Makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka ha rano ' taru atia ' walia o ' a , ne hya ' a nrei pia omhuarani riy ?
John answered them , I baptize in water , but among you stands one whom you do n't know . ||| Noma Yohansi nakot la niwra , A ' di de agala gera ga gharania riy . Mere miy e mior wutga riy maka miy mieh ' a nekane edonna miat niohor ma'ta E ' a .
He is the one who comes after me , who is preferred before me , whose sandal strap I 'm not worthy to loosen . ||| Hota Nmai pia Nlernohor a ' u , mere awue'er doin lakni wniowni ho'mana a ' g edonna puar nana .
These things were done in Bethany beyond the Jordan , where John was baptizing . ||| La ' hare honona de rhi ' nana la leta Betania la ' a gerlawna Yordan walli tipru , la ' a gen miaka Yohansi nharani riy .
The next day , he saw Jesus coming to him , and said , Behold , the Lamb of God , who takes away the sin of the world ! ||| La'pa repar dewade Yohansi namkek de Yesus Nmai wia , noma Yohansi nakot la niwra , Mimkek ee ! Uplerlawna Dum A'nani mak kuhi-kho'ora rimormiori do'oni-halli Nmai olek dee !
This is he of whom I said , ‘ After me comes a man who is preferred before me , for he was before me . ' ||| Hade ed maka a'ukota , mak ktawli'ir la mai a ' u , mere inponni rehi a ' u yoma a i'nu edonna ntor ma'ta a lia nohkerna wawannu de E ' ed olek la wa .
I did n't know him , but for this reason I came baptizing in water , that he would be revealed to Israel . ||| La ler ululu de a'uplin mua'ta de he ' eda makla ' Uplerlawna Dum A'nani dena . Mere amua gal ger la ga gharani riy totpena atiutg E ' la riy Israel re totpena rat niohora .
John testified , saying , I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven , and it remained on him . I did n't recognize him , but he who sent me to baptize in water said to me , ‘ On whomever you will see the Spirit descending and remaining on him is he who baptizes in the Holy Spirit . ' ||| La ' ler ululu de a ' g edonna gat niohor ma'ta he ' E ' a . Mere Uplerlawna mak khopan pa agala gera ga gharania riy , de ed maka kakot mai a ' u Niwra , La'pa mumkek nana A Nhiw Lulu'lu Nerun pa nden la riy ida , de hota hade ed mak kala Nhi'wu ka kharani . Noma la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' lerni de na'nama a ' g e umkek de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nerun de emolmolla ma'nu lmo'ma maru mak kwatiawua lyanti , pa Ntai lia E wawannu pa agat niohor E ' a .
I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of God . ||| Pede la dodo'ondi de a ' g ed maka kamkek olek memna la a ma'tu . Hade emkade pede a ' g ed maka kakot nohora tiy miy die , la E ' de de Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a .
Again , the next day , John was standing with two of his disciples , ||| La'pa repar wa , noma Yohansi nora riy woru maklernohor reri e ' a re rawali owa'an la gen die .
and he looked at Jesus as he walked , and said , Behold , the Lamb of God ! ||| Noma Yohansi namkek nana Yesus nwehweti dewade nakot la re niwra , Mimkeka Uplerlawna Dum A'nani inhatta !
The two disciples heard him speak , and they followed Jesus . ||| La'pa riy maroro ' mak klernohor reria Yohansi ratlin nana ed lir de noma rora rla ' pa rlernohora Yesus .
Jesus turned and saw them following , and said to them , What are you looking for ? They said to him , Rabbi which is to say , being interpreted , Teacher , where are you staying ? ||| Noma Yesus Nkillia to'orni , de Namkek nana rrora e rlernohor reria E ' a . Noma Yesus Natiana re Niwra , Miy e mihaka hya ' a ? Noma rrora riwra , Rabi Tungkurga , O genmu etla hanmeni ?
He said to them , Come and see . They came and saw where he was staying , and they stayed with him that day . It was about the tenth hour . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Ma mieh ' a mimkeka . Noma rlernohora pa rla ramkeka Yesus genni . La ' lera lia'ani jam 4 de , noma ror rewre'wa Yesus pa rden wutu pa la'pa mela ndamit wa .
One of the two who heard John and followed him was Andrew , Simon Peter 's brother . ||| La ' riy id la ' a riy maroro ' a ri , de Andarias , Simon Petrus hyalli .
He first found his own brother , Simon , and said to him , We have found the Messiah ! which is , being interpreted , Christ . ||| La ' pa nora Yesus rwahaur la genni nhorwua noma Andarias pleta-plet pa nla owa'an pa nla nwahaka hyalli Simon pa nakot la niwra , Hyalia , ami e mpatrom nan oleka Mesias ! Mak ha nwet la Mesias de yawala Ibrani , mere la ' a yawala Yunani de riwra Kristus , de nnia'eratni de Ray maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori .
He brought him to Jesus . Jesus looked at him and said , You are Simon the son of Jonah . You shall be called Cephas which is by interpretation , Peter . ||| Noma Andarias nodia Simon la ' Yesus de . Noma Yesus Nkillia Simon na'nama Nakot la Niwra , O ' di de Simon , Yonas a'nani . Pena rwet o la Kefas maka la ' yawal Yunani de rweta la Petrus , de nnia'eratni de watu muetam kerna .
On the next day , he was determined to go out into Galilee , and he found Philip . Jesus said to him , Follow me . ||| La'pa repar wa noma Yesus Nwaror pa Nla'awa Galilea . Noma Nwahak pa la'pa Nwatrom nana Pilipsu noma Nakot la Niwra , Pilipsu , mua mliernohor A ' u !
Now Philip was from Bethsaida , the city of Andrew and Peter . ||| Pilipus di de riy Betsaida ida di , ne Andarias nora Petrus mana rwatiawu wali hande .
Philip found Nathanael , and said to him , We have found him of whom Moses in the law and also the prophets , wrote , Jesus of Nazareth , the son of Joseph . ||| Noma Pilipsu nla nwatrom nana Nataniel pa nakot walia niwra , Eh , ampatrom nan oleka Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Musa nakot nohora la Puk maka ha rhorat targa Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni me la ' walia maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu ha rhorat tar walia . Hade de Yesus mak kwatiawua Nasaret , Yusup a'nani !
Nathanael said to him , Can any good thing come out of Nazareth ? Philip said to him , Come and see . ||| Mere Nataniel nwahla lir de niwra , Ah , Nasaret de kuku ' nekane , Ray Makamori-Kalewna de Nwatiawu handena ? ! Noma Pilipsu nakot la , Mai pia mueh ' a mumkek memna .
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him , and said about him , Behold , an Israelite indeed , in whom is no deceit ! ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek de Nataniel nmai wia , noma Nakot nohor Nataniel Niwra , Mimkek la , makden Israel plollolli inhatta id nmai wiee ! E ' de maka ka'ohpa-kalahar atia ' e ' a .
Nathanael said to him , How do you know me ? Jesus answered him , Before Philip called you , when you were under the fig tree , I saw you . ||| Noma Nataniel natiana la Yesus niwra , Tuna , la emkameni pede omuat niohor a yeh'wu ? Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Eh , Pilipsu edonna npol mua't o ' a , de A ' g e umkek nan o la ' kar on id nayanni .
Nathanael answered him , Rabbi , you are the Son of God ! You are King of Israel ! ||| Noma Nataniel nakot la niwra , Tungkurga , O ' di de Uplerlawna A'nani O ' a . O ' ed mak khi ' Ray lia Israel luwnu-a'nani .
Jesus answered him , Because I told you , ‘ I saw you underneath the fig tree , ' do you believe ? You will see greater things than these ! ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , O e mpuesiay yoma dodo'ondi de A'ukotiwra A'umkek olek o ' a la ' a kar on id nayanni ? ! Hya ' maka kareh dioin memna A hihi ' u-yapya'pu de , hota mumkek memna .
He said to him , Most certainly , I tell you all , hereafter you will see heaven opened , and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man . ||| Plola mpiesiayo , hota mimkek nana lyanti naphyariari ne Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikat re hota rernu-rha'ata pa rmai lia Rimormiori A'nani A ' die !
The third day , there was a wedding in Cana of Galilee . Jesus ' mother was there . ||| La'pa lera woru rtaw dioinia pa lera wotell wua noma e rhi ' a he ' i-hepur la mak kmehlima la ' a leta Kana , de Galilea letni ida . Ne Yesus inni ed wal lia hande .
Jesus also was invited , with his disciples , to the wedding . ||| Yesus Nora maklernohor reria re , rlernan walia polpuolu la ' a he ' i-hepur de .
When the wine ran out , Jesus ' mother said to him , They have no wine . ||| La'pa anggur turnu maka ha remnia la he ' i-hepur de nhorwua , noma Yesus inni nakot la niwra , Yesus ! Hare anggur turnu nhorwua .
Jesus said to her , Woman , what does that have to do with you and me ? My hour has not yet come . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Yan mukot mai a ' u , ina . Edonna nte ' ma'ta la Uplerlawna lerni pa Agharia ino'nu .
His mother said to the servants , Whatever he says to you , do it . ||| Mere Yesus inni nakot la mak ktulla-kari re , Mliernohor neka hya ' mak Ha Nakota tiy miy .
Now there were six water pots of stone set there after the Jews ' way of purifying , containing two or three metretes apiece . ||| La hande de e rwahi ' targa kuhi wonema , maka ha rhi ' a la ' watu , maka nhi'inde rken ger la pa rlernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni pa ra rwuri-rohma . Kuhi re mniotni de edonna nhal de , ida , de na'nana potla rahu rehenu 100 liter .
Jesus said to them , Fill the water pots with water . So they filled them up to the brim . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la mak ktulla-kari re , Niwra , Mhiur ger la ' kuhi re . Dewade rhur ger la kuhi re wonema pa rpenpuenu .
He said to them , Now draw some out , and take it to the ruler of the feast . So they took it . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , Mia'ala ger de oke ' la dodo'ondi wa pa miala la mak khi ' o'tani la ' a he ' i-hepru . Noma rodia ger della la ' a mak khi ' o'tani la he ' i-hepur de .
When the ruler of the feast tasted the water now become wine , and did n't know where it came from but the servants who had drawn the water knew , the ruler of the feast called the bridegroom ||| La'pa nto ' targa nurnu la ger maka kwali olek la anggur de , de naplin niohora anggur de nwatiawua hanmeni , atiaru mak ktulla-kari mak khuri-kwalia gera la kuhi re nanpena rat niohora re . Noma mak khi ' o'tani la he ' i-hepur de npolu a'na muanke ' a mak kmehlim de pa nmai .
and said to him , Everyone serves the good wine first , and when the guests have drunk freely , then that which is worse . You have kept the good wine until now ! ||| Na'nama nakot la , Nhi'inde la ' a kniari emkari , de ral ulga anggur tur mikmikri , la'pa remun pa rmah wenna nanpena rala maka niemannu namnapnapla . Mere hadi de miy e mide ' targa anggur tur mikmikir di pa na'nama milgota .
This beginning of his signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee , and revealed his glory , and his disciples believed in him . ||| Hadi ed maka Yesus Nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat mulaliaini mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , ne Nhi ' nan hade la ' a leta Kana , Galilea letni de . La ' hade totpena Entutga E preheni-mkaini la nohkerna wawannu . Dewade mak klernohor reri re rpesiay tioto ' memna E ' a .
After this , he went down to Capernaum , he , and his mother , his brothers , and his disciples , and they stayed there a few days . ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nora inni , amni-hyalli , me la ' walia maklernohor reri E ' a re rla'awa la ' a leta Kapernaum . Rden nek la ' hande pa lera ida-woru .
The Passover of the Jews was at hand , and Jesus went up to Jerusalem . ||| La'pa Paska lerni nwakrian wia de la ' ler maka Yahudi rhoratreria tuini-wedni la ' ler maka rwe'er doin la wutwutu-kokgohu la ' Mesir noma Yesus Nla'awa la Yerusalem .
He found in the temple those who sold oxen , sheep , and doves , and the changers of money sitting . ||| La ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini mak kden la Yerusalem de walli-walli , de Yesus Nhortiut niana rimormiori mak ranie'er la krei die herni-gaini pa ramtatna pa ra'olu-rala ' a pipi-duma , hayori-orpau me onu-ma'nu me rwahernu-rwahala kupna-kai .
He made a whip of cords and drove all out of the temple , both the sheep and the oxen , and he poured out the changers ' money and overthrew their tables . ||| Dewade Yesus Ntal niana tali id pa na Nhokra-nlai mak ka'olu-kala ' a ror wutga nhiuri-wnia'an mak kden la hande , ne Nliwra pa kurna-kiatra re . Mei-kader no ' hande maka rnairia ra rwahernu-rwahala kupna , de Nte'la rpa Nkowa-nwalia re pa nhi'nande kupna-kai re knunu-knera .
To those who sold the doves , he said , Take these things out of here ! Do n't make my Father 's house a marketplace ! ||| Noma Nakot la mak ka'olu-kala ' a ma'nu lmo'ma maru re Niwra , Hoi ! Mrian doinia harella handi . Yan memmemna mhi ' a A A'mu romni dilla ya'olu-yala ' a geni !
His disciples remembered that it was written , Zeal for your house will eat me up . ||| Noma maklernohor reri re rhoratnana la ' Puka lirni niwra , Mak A ralmu ha nko ' i reria de totpena O rommu ed mak rimormiori rnairia pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla nek tiy O ' a Uplerlawnu ne ! Ne maka A ralmu nko ' i reria de hota nod A lia matmiati-molmuolu ralamni .
The Jews therefore answered him , What sign do you show us , seeing that you do these things ? ||| Noma ina-ama ror wutga o'ta-mat let Yahudi re rapal lia Yesus pa rawowo'ora . Rakot la Yesus riwra , Omhi ' teka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat la am di , totpena amatga de O hihi'imu-yapyapmu ri de e lol talanni .
Jesus answered them , Destroy this temple , and in three days I will raise it up . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka Atiutg tiy miy die de emkadi , hota mpieye'era Uplerlawna romni di , ne la ' pena A'uriri owa'an la lera wotellu .
The Jews therefore said , It took forty-six years to build this temple ! Will you raise it up in three days ? ||| Noma riwra , It upni-tgarni rkaria Uplerlawna roma kreini di la ' a anni terampwogata wehrani wonema , ne Omiwra hota Omuriri tio ' a la lera wotellu ? !
But he spoke of the temple of his body . ||| Mere e raplin niohora la Uplerlawna romni maka Yesus Nakot de , de E inon wamueheni inhatta .
When therefore he was raised from the dead , his disciples remembered that he said this , and they believed the Scripture and the word which Jesus had said . ||| Hade pede la'pa Yesus Nmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni , de maklernohor reria re nhioratni e ndawar nana hya ' a maka Nakot taru ri . Pede la ' ler de meman pa rpesiay tioto ' memna hya ' ed maka Puka ha nakota , me la ' walia maka Yesus Nakota de .
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover , during the feast , many believed in his name , observing his signs which he did . ||| La'pa Yesus ed ma'ta la ' a Yerusalem yoma Yahudi lerlalawanni Paska de edonna nhor mua'ta , de riy harahu rpesiaya Yesus , yoma la ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka Nhi ' nana re pa Ntutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini .
But Jesus did n't entrust himself to them , because he knew everyone , ||| Mere Yesus Nmeh ' a nekane edonna Npesiay ma't hare , yoma Enat niohor oleka rimormiori yehwani .
and because he did n't need for anyone to testify concerning man , for he himself knew what was in man . ||| E ' edonna Nwahaka lira yano ' a-ya'atu la ' a rimormiori yehwani la ' a riy meni-meni to ' a yoma E ' nek de e Nat niohora rimormiori ihranu ralamni .
Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus , a ruler of the Jews . ||| Noma riy ida nanni Nikodemus , de riy Parisi ida mak kre ' teman la mak ktorna watghudi la agama Yahudi .
He came to Jesus by night and said to him , Rabbi , we know that you are a teacher come from God , for no one can do these signs that you do , unless God is with him . ||| La ' mela ida de enmaiya Yesus pa nakot la niwra , Am tungkurga , ami e matg oleka de Uplerlawna ed mak khopn O ' pa Omua Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a rimormiori . Yoma riy meni ho'mana edon nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini emeka Omhi ' nana re , atiaru me nodia Uplerlawna plolli .
Jesus answered him , Most certainly I tell you , unless one is born anew , he ca n't see God 's Kingdom . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mpuesiaya , hota riy id mana edon rler wut et mieman la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , maka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la pa emeka ir Rayni , atiaru me , rmori owa'an e ' a .
Nicodemus said to him , How can a man be born when he is old ? Can he enter a second time into his mother 's womb and be born ? ||| Nikodemus nwahla , Tuna , hota emkameni owa'an pa rmori owa'an rimormiori ida mak khamto ' a-khape'ew olekwa re ? Plollola pa ta'en niana nla ' owa'an la inni puhunni apannu ralamni pa rmori owa'an la re'eni wornu toh ? !
Jesus answered , Most certainly I tell you , unless one is born of water and Spirit , he ca n't enter into God 's Kingdom . ||| Yesus Nwahla Niwra , Mpuesiaya , eneknek to'ama riy rmor niana la re'eni wornu , maka rnairia gera ra ramou-rawitna me la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiwni Narialmua , demade nre ' wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , mak Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la pa emeka ir Rayni .
That which is born of the flesh is flesh . That which is born of the Spirit is spirit . ||| Yoma rimormiori inonni de it inni ed maka nmor niana , mere mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de nwatiawua Uplerlawna Nhiwni .
Do n't marvel that I said to you , ‘ You must be born anew . ' ||| Yana mpuer rer wiapmu la'pa Agiwra rayori owa'an miy hononmi nanpena mlier wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu .
The wind blows where it wants to , and you hear its sound , but do n't know where it comes from and where it is going . So is everyone who is born of the Spirit . ||| Itala anni pa tsi ' a la yawalliohora , La'pa anni nten liol meni-meni de plolli nek la et nnieni . Hota itatlina anni tnienni , mere itaplin niohora anin de nwatiawua hanmeni pa nla hanmeni . Hota emkade wal lia riy maka riwra Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nayor niana . Yoma it edon todi plolli la Nhiwni de onde tat niohora E yala'ani mere itamkek memna E limni enni la ' a rimormiori nhiolli-lietni .
Nicodemus answered him , How can these things be ? ||| Noma Nikodemus nakot la niwra , Hota hade emkameni totpena naplol la O ltiermu dena ?
Jesus answered him , Are you the teacher of Israel , and do n't understand these things ? ||| Yesus Nakot la Niwra , O ' di de tungkurga Israel id o ' a maka riy rhu'ru-rhelma . Ne hya ' nrei pia omuplin niohora di ?
Most certainly I tell you , we speak that which we know and testify of that which we have seen , and you do n't receive our witness . ||| Mpuesiayo ! Amaltier di de amakot nohora hya ' maka ami e mat niohora , ne amakot nohora hadoma de la ' a hya ' maka amamkek walia la a mat mamni . Mere miy e mihmena mrieiniana hya ' maka amakot nohora .
If I told you earthly things and you do n't believe , how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things ? ||| Miy edonna mpiesiaya la ' a hya ' maka A'ukot nohora tiy miy la ' a hya ' mak kwatiawua nohkeran di . Ne hota emkameni targho'ola A'ukot nohora la Ilyamou-Watyatoha yala'ani ? !
No one has ascended into heaven but he who descended out of heaven , the Son of Man , who is in heaven . ||| La ' riy id mana edonna nha'at ma'ta la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nerun olek la noha wawannu di pa rakot nohora Ilyamou-Watyatoha gahani . Enekneka Rimormiori A'nani A ' die mak kerun pa kakot nohora re .
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness , even so must the Son of Man be lifted up , ||| Ne hota emekwalima Musa nwairia niy pi'ra la ' a ai lioha id la wo'orletna-kawurloini totpena he ' ed mak kwatniar reria niy pi'ra de , hota rler la yamori-yalewna la ' a niy mak kihi ira , de hota emkade wal lia , Uplerlawna Nror targ oleka de rla rwairia Rimormiori A'nani A ' u la au hananni .
that whoever believes in him should not perish , but have eternal life . ||| Totpena riy honona mak kpesiay A ' die rlernana mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
For God so loved the world , that he gave his only born Son , that whoever believes in him should not perish , but have eternal life . ||| De yoma Uplerlawna sniayanni la ' a rimormiori nohkeran di inponni memna , pede Enala Wutmueheni-Laimieheni A ' die , totpena ha meni mak kpesiay A ' die hota edonna nler la matmiati-molmuolu pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni mere nlernana mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
For God did n't send his Son into the world to judge the world , but that the world should be saved through him . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nalernia A'nani A ' die , de edonna muai pia tiorna watghudi la nohkeran di . Mere Amuai die totpena A'umori-ulewna rimormiori .
He who believes in him is not judged . He who does n't believe has been judged already , because he has not believed in the name of the only born Son of God . ||| Riy maka kpesiay A ' die hota edonna rukmua . Mere riy mak edonna kpesiay Uplerlawna Wutmueheni-Laimieheni A ' u de rto'on reria oleka yoma edonna npesiay Uplerlawna Wutmueheni-Laimieheni .
This is the judgment , that the light has come into the world , and men loved the darkness rather than the light , for their works were evil . ||| Rto'on reria , yoma A ' u maka rweta la Lelerni de muai olek la nohkerna wawannu , mere rimormiori rreiniana-ra'nana ma'ta ha melmelli de . Ha rreiniana-ra'nana melmelli de yoma hihi'ini-yapyapni re lola yatyatni-halalli ralamni .
For everyone who does evil hates the light and does n't come to the light , lest his works would be exposed . ||| Rimormior miaka khi ' yatyatni-halalli , rahankeran rer lia Lelerni de , pa rahmena rma rrehgorga Lelerni , yanhi'pa riy ramkek nana ir yatni-halli .
But he who does the truth comes to the light , that his works may be revealed , that they have been done in God . ||| Mere mak kden la plol wawna , de nma nrehgorg Lelerni de , totpena riy ramkek nan memna de hya ' mak ha nhi ' nana re , de e nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
After these things , Jesus came with his disciples into the land of Judea . He stayed there with them and baptized . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rla'awa la Yudea liewnu . Enden nek la hande pa Nalera-namel nohora re , me la ' hande de Enharan wialia riy .
John also was baptizing in Enon near Salim , because there was much water there . They came and were baptized , for John was not yet thrown into prison . ||| La ' ler de wal pia Yohansi edonna nla ma'ta roma nhio'la ralamni . Mere enharan wali riy la ' a leta Anon mak edon olieta la ' a leta Salim , yoma la ' hande de ger lawna etla . Ne rirahu rma rod niohor e ' a totpena rlernana nhiarani .
Therefore a dispute arose on the part of John 's disciples with some Jews about purification . ||| Noma maklernohor reri Yohansi re dom rora riy Yahudi dom to ' a , de rahuri-rawo'or la ' a deulu-tatra mak kakot nohora ramou-rawitna .
They came to John and said to him , Rabbi , he who was with you beyond the Jordan , to whom you have testified , behold , he baptizes , and everyone is coming to him . ||| Noma rla rakot la Yohansi riwra , Tungkurga , o ' e mhuoratrer mia'ta riy maka kora o ' pa kden la gerlawna Yordan walli dena , maka omukot nohora la rira . Riy de ed mak omtiutga mai ami me la ' walia la ' riy dom to ' a , la ler ululu toh ! La ' dodo'ondi de Enharan wiali riy , ne riy liawanni e rla ' E ' de , me edon rmai owa'an o ' a !
John answered , A man can receive nothing unless it has been given him from heaven . ||| Noma Yohansi nakot la re niwra , Emkadella wa . Yoma rimormior id ho'mana ta'en niana rhi ' hadomdoma , eneknek to ' pa la'pa rlernana ra ' a-palu karunia la Uplerlawna , nanpena rwo'la-rlekur la hare honona .
You yourselves testify that I said , ‘ I am not the Christ , ' but , ‘ I have been sent before him . ' ||| Miy orgahami nek de mitlin oleka la mak a'ukota re agiwra a ' di de Ray miak kamori-kalewna atia ' a ' u toh ! Rhopan nek a ' pua a lia ulga E ' a .
He who has the bride is the bridegroom , but the friend of the bridegroom , who stands and hears him , rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom 's voice . Therefore my joy is made full . ||| Ne la ' dodo'ondi de A ralmu nahepuepur reri yoma Mak awuahi ' targa talla la E ' de Enmai olekwa di . A ' niek de emolmolannek to'ama muanke ' a pliolioini . Ne E ' de emolmolan nekama muanke ' a mak kiwra kmehlima . A ' g wuahi ' targa hare honona la ' a muanke ' a mak kmehlima de mehlimni-marya'ani . Ne la'pa lerni ntu'tu pa muanke ' de nor hawni rler la ihyida-ralmida de a'uhepuepur nohora .
He must increase , but I must decrease . ||| Uplerlawna ralma-riorni de totpa rimormiori ya'ulli-yawedni la E ' a na'ititar rer lia , mere totpa yeher to ' pa A ' die Adien la li'iru .
He who comes from above is above all . He who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks of the earth . He who comes from heaven is above all . ||| E ' ed mak kwatiawu heyanna , pa ed maka kareh momuou lia riy honona . Mak kwatiawu nohkerna wawannu de riy nohkerna , pede naltier die nakot nohora nohkerna gahani . Mere E mak kmai die Nwatiawua heyanan pa tullu nareh dioinia hare honona .
What he has seen and heard , of that he testifies , and no one receives his witness . ||| Pede Naltier die Nakot nohora maka Namkeka me maka Natlina , mere rimormiori nohkeran di edonna rpesiaya hya ' ed maka Ha Nakota re .
He who has received his witness has set his seal to this , that God is true . ||| Mere riy meni mak pesiaya maka Ha Nakot nohora re de , hare er mak kwayow nana Uplerlawna lirni re er mak kaplola .
For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God , for God gives the Spirit without measure . ||| Yoma Yesus , maka Uplerlawna Nhopan pa Nmai die ed mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , yoma Uplerlawna Nal oleka E Nhiwni pa Napenga ihranu ralamni .
The Father loves the Son , and has given all things into his hand . ||| Ne Uplerlawna , Amlawanni de Nhi ' kalwiedweda A'nani de , ne Nal oleka plola-mneha pa Ntorna-nrautia hare honona .
One who believes in the Son has eternal life , but one who disobeys the Son wo n't see life , but the wrath of God remains on him . ||| Pede riy maka kpesiaya Uplerlawna A'nani de , de hota nlernan mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Mere la'pa riy maka edonna klernohora A'na de hota edonna nlernana mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni , mere hota la ' lera-mela ri de Uplerlawna Nto'on olek ir la hala pa rden rer niek la Uplerlawna niukamnu pa nodi liarni .
Therefore when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John although Jesus himself did n't baptize , but his disciples , he left Judea and departed into Galilee . ||| Noma riy Parisi re ratlin nan de riy liawanni rlernohor reria Yesus me rwak pa Nharania , de liawanni reh dioinia la mak klernohor Yohansi . Mere la ' a plollolli de Yesus edonna Nharani , mak kharani de riy maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re . Mere la'pa Itmatromni Natga de riy Parisi ratlin oleka hya ' ed maka Enora E limni-rorni rhi ' oleka re , noma Nwatitin la Yudea pa Nawali owa'an la ' a Galilea yanpa Parisi re rhi ' yatyat la E ' a .
He needed to pass through Samaria . ||| La ' yala'ani plahwani de hota Enlol wal lia Samaria .
So he came to a city of Samaria called Sychar , near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph . ||| Noma la'pa nte'ela Samaria letni mak kwawa Sikhar . Let de edonna olieta la ' gen miaka Yahudi re upni-tgarni Yakop nala la a'nani Yusup pa nhi ' a la gahani la ' ler ululu .
Jacob 's well was there . Jesus therefore , being tired from his journey , sat down by the well . It was about the sixth hour . ||| La ' hande , de Yakop gera tnipnu etla . Pa Yesus Nala ' nan de nmah wenna , noma Namtatna pa Nrena la ' a gera tnipu die onni . La'pa edonna nhal de lera nwawuau ro'onni .
A woman of Samaria came to draw water . Jesus said to her , Give me a drink . For his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food . ||| Dewade maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rodi liarni la leta ralamni pa rla rawelia ya'ana-yemnu . Edon nalo'on wali ne pat Samaria ida nma tip gera . Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Ina , mtiulan pa muala ger de oke ' pa Agemnio ?
The Samaritan woman therefore said to him , How is it that you , being a Jew , ask for a drink from me , a Samaritan woman ? For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans . ||| Noma pat Samari ' de nakot la niwra , Tuna O ' de riy Yahudi id O ' a , ne a ' di de Samaria id a ' u . Ne emkameni owa'an pa Mpuak ger la mai a ' u ? Enakot emkade yoma nhi'inde makden Yahudi rmakriarnia makden Samaria pa edon rora pa rwatamputu .
Jesus answered her , If you knew the gift of God , and who it is who says to you , ‘ Give me a drink , ' you would have asked him , and he would have given you living water . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Ine , la'pa omuatga de he ' to ' a A ' di me muat niohora Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu maka Enala rimormiori , de hota omueh ' a neka ed mak kwaka la A ' pua omuemnia . Ne hota A ' g ed mak kala ger mormiori-laliahu della ' o ' a .
The woman said to him , Sir , you have nothing to draw with , and the well is deep . So where do you get that living water ? ||| Noma pat Samari ' de nakot la niwra , Hota Tuna nakleh kewtu ne ger di mana kdielma pa hota Tuna Nlernan ger mormior dilla hanme ?
Are you greater than our father Jacob , who gave us the well and drank from it himself , as did his children and his livestock ? ||| Yakop , a upa-tgar mamni de ed mak kala gera tnip dilla mai ami . E ' nek de nma nala ger di pa nemnia me la ' walia upni-a'nani ror wutga nhiurni-wnia'anni mana remnu ger di . Pa Tuna yanpa Natniekame Tuna inpona narehia Yakopa ? !
Jesus answered her , Everyone who drinks of this water will thirst again , ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Hota he ' ed mak kemun ger di de hota nahekru tiernu tiernu nkern owa'ana .
but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst again , but the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life . ||| Mere la'pa he ' a nemnia ger mak hota Agala , de edon nwahak owa'an ger pa nemnia . Yoma ger mak hota Agal di , de nwal lia ger ormata la inonni tetema , ne nwahi'da pa nwau liora , totpena riy de nlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
The woman said to him , Sir , give me this water , so that I do n't get thirsty , neither come all the way here to draw . ||| Noma pat de nakot la niwra , Tuna , emkade de , Muala ger de mai a ' u , totpena yana a tie'ru nkern owa'ana . Ne totpena yana uprehen nek la mua tipua ger di wa .
Jesus said to her , Go , call your husband , and come here . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mlia ' pa mpuolga muanke'emu pa mrio ' a mmiai .
The woman answered , I have no husband . Jesus said to her , You said well , ‘ I have no husband , ' ||| A'ukleha muanke ' a tune ! Yesus Nakot la , Plola la o lirmu .
for you have had five husbands , and he whom you now have is not your husband . This you have said truly . ||| Yoma omuehlim nan oleka re'eni wolim pa. Ne muanke ' maka omuora mhiol wiut lia dodo'ondi , de o muanke'emu atia ' hade .
The woman said to him , Sir , I perceive that you are a prophet . ||| Noma pat de nakot la Yesus niwra , Na'nama agatga Tuna de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id O ' a .
Our fathers worshiped in this mountain , and you Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where people ought to worship . ||| Makden Samari ' ami , up mamni-tgar mamni rhoi lima-rtan riora la Uplerlawna la wo'or di . Mere Tuna luwnu-a'nani Yahudi riwra atiaru la ' to ' a Yerusalem nanpena rira rpolu-rwak la Uplerlawna .
Jesus said to her , Woman , believe me , the hour is coming when neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father . ||| Yesus Niwra , Mpuesiay A'uo , la ' lera ida de hota riy rpolu-rwak la it Amlawanni de edonna rmai lia wo'or di , me Yerusalem nek de edonan wali .
You worship that which you do n't know . We worship that which we know , for salvation is from the Jews . ||| Riy Samaria miy die mpiolu-mpiak la ' a Uplerlawna maka miplin niohora onni-ga'arni talanni . Mere riy Yahudi am die ampolu-mpak la Uplerlawna mak ami e mat niohora yala'ani , yoma hota mori-lewan de ha nwatiawua riy Yahudi ami .
But the hour comes , and now is , when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth , for the Father seeks such to be his worshipers . ||| Mere la'pa nte'ela lerni-melli mak kmai , me plollolli de ed olekwa di , de riy rpolu-rwak la it Amlawanni Uplerlawna rnair talan mak kaplollola , yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni Ntulan la ira totpena ratu rpolu-rwak la it Amlawanni . Yoma riy mak kola tieru-kawur nehla la Uplerlawna rnair talan emkade , de ir er maka Uplerlawna Nwahaka inhatta .
God is spirit , and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth . ||| Yoma Uplerlawan de Nhiw to ' hade ne he ' ed mak kiwra kola tieru-kawur nehla la E ' a , de Nlernohora E Nhiwni me la ' a hya ' ed mak kaplola .
The woman said to him , I know that Messiah is coming , he who is called Christ . When he has come , he will declare to us all things . ||| Noma pat Samaria de nakot la Yesus niwra , A ' g e gat niohora Ray Makamori-Kalewna mak riwra Kristus hota Nmai . La'pa Enmai die hota Enod kiot la mai it la ' hare honona .
Jesus said to her , I am he , the one who speaks to you . ||| Yesus Niwra , A ' di de E inhatta . Mak kaltiertier rieri A ' g inhatti pa gor o ' pa maltieri .
Just then , his disciples came . They marveled that he was speaking with a woman , yet no one said , What are you looking for ? or , Why do you speak with her ? ||| La'pa rwahagaur reri dewade maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rmai wia , ne rwer rer wiawni , yoma Yesus nora pat Samaria ida e rwahauru . Mere riy id mana edonna nkokan nohor patke ' de la ' a ratiana hya ' ed maka ha nwahaka ? Onde nihya'pa Yesus Nor pat Samari ' de raltieri ?
So the woman left her water pot , went away into the city , and said to the people , ||| Dewade patke ' Samaria de naltarga kewatnu pa nawal lia letni pa la nakot nohora hya ' maka ha natlin nana la gera wawannu de , la ' a letlawan de ralamni . Nakot la mak kden la leta ralamni niwra ,
Come , see a man who told me everything that I have done . Can this be the Christ ? ||| Ee ! Mai pia tla pa mimkeka riy mak kakot nohora a nhio'lu-lie'tu honona . Matialo'onama riy de Ray Makamori-Kalewna inhatta ?
They went out of the city , and were coming to him . ||| Dewade mak ha nakot la re rawlar pia rla rod tiemna Yesus la ' a leta to'orni .
In the meanwhile , the disciples urged him , saying , Rabbi , eat . ||| Mere la'pa edon rte ' ma'ta la Yesus , de maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rwahi ' pa rora Yesus ra'ana-remnu . Rakot la Yesus riwra , Tungkurga , it ta'an wa .
But he said to them , I have food to eat that you do n't know about . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , A wareheru etla , mere miy e miplin niohora de !
The disciples therefore said to one another , Has anyone brought him something to eat ? ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re idma natian ida niwra , Yanpa riy dom rodia wareher la E ' a ?
Jesus said to them , My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to accomplish his work . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , La'pa Aliernohora Uplerlawna mak khopn A ' u de ralma-riorni , me ghi ' ahorga kniar mak Enala mai A ' u , hade nhi ' A ralmu pa uhepru , emeknekama riy mak kaplar de na'an yamanna pa npeher wa .
Do n't you say , ‘ There are yet four months until the harvest ' ? Behold , I tell you , lift up your eyes and look at the fields , that they are white for harvest already . ||| Nhi'inde miy e mikota miwra , Hota tre ' ma'ta wolla wogat pa noha reiki-wo'ora . Mere A'ukot tiy miy . Mimkek la Samaria re mak kmai nieka yoma riwra rpesiay A ' u ! Ir emolmolan nekama nhyi ' a-tlunni mak kwahi ' pa rreikia wa yoma rwahi ' pa rpesiay A ' u !
He who reaps receives wages and gathers fruit to eternal life , that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together . ||| Dodo'ondi meman pa emeka reiki-wo'ora lerni . Ler di meman pa Uplerlawna Nala riy pa rpesiaya pa emeknekama kniarmi wniahlani . Ne hota riy mak kpesiaya re rler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Totpa hota emeknekama la ' a riy mak ktamni nhyi ' a , rora mak kreiki-kwo'ora de ralamni rahepru yoma rler rewre'wa la kalwiedweda la ' a pripanni-fa'anni .
For in this the saying is true , ‘ One sows , and another reaps . ' ||| Pa hota naplol la yawalliohor de mak kiwra , Ida ntamni , ida nreiki .
I sent you to reap that for which you have n't labored . Others have labored , and you have entered into their labor . ||| Yoma Aghopan pa mlia ' a nhyi ' a-tlunan mak miy edonna miprehen la , totpa hota mliernana pripanni-fa'anni . Riy dom to ' a rala ' ulu pua raprehen olek la hare wa . Mere miy er mak klernana pripanni-fa'anni la ' ira kniarni .
From that city many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the word of the woman , who testified , He told me everything that I have done . ||| Mak kden la Samaria liawanni rpesiaya Yesus yoma la ' a pat de lirni niwra Yesus Nakot momuoga hya ' maka nhi'inde pat de nhi ' nan oleka re .
So when the Samaritans came to him , they begged him to stay with them . He stayed there two days . ||| Pede la'pa riy Samaria re rma rwatrom nana Yesus noma rwak la Yesus pa Ntulan pa Nora ir pa rhol wiutu . Pede Enor ir pa rhol wiut lia ' lera woru .
Many more believed because of his word . ||| Ne la ' a lira-tunu maka orgahi Nmeh ' a Nwatutga la ira , pede rirahu rpesiay walia Yesus .
They said to the woman , Now we believe , not because of your speaking , for we have heard for ourselves , and know that this is indeed the Christ , the Savior of the world . ||| Noma rakot la pat de , riwra , La ' a ler di de ampesiaya , de ami edonna mhapar rer tio'ola hya ' ed mak omukota mai ami , yoma ameh ' a matlin memna la E ' a , ne amatg olek walia la E ' de , de plola Makamori-Kalewna rimormiori nohkerna inhatta .
After the two days he went out from there and went into Galilee . ||| La'pa Yesus Ndella leta Sikhar la ' ler woru , noma Nla'awa la Galilea , de E let wamueheni .
For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country . ||| Yesus Nmeh ' a nek de Enakot oleka Niwra , La ' makwohorulu-ktatrulu id nek de hota edonna rhu'ru-rhelam la let wamueheni .
So when he came into Galilee , the Galileans received him , having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast , for they also went to the feast . ||| Mere la'pa Yesus e Nte ' tar lia Galilea de mak kden la hande rala ralamni rapranran pa rreiniana-ra'nana Yesus , yoma la ' ler ululu de e rawok tar lia Yerusalem , la ' a Yahudi lerlalawanni Paska , noma ramkek oleka hare honona maka Yesus Nhi ' nana re .
Jesus came therefore again to Cana of Galilee , where he made the water into wine . There was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus Nawal lia ' leta Kana la Galilea , la ' gen miaka Nhi ' oleka gera pa nwal lia anggur turnu de . Mere la ' leta Kapernaum de riy ida mak kla ' ray tniutnu-nhianni-nhielli-liarni ida , maka a'nani ida temni nhi ' a .
When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee , he went to him and begged him that he would come down and heal his son , for he was at the point of death . ||| La'pa natlin nana Yesus Nwatiawua Yudea pa etla ' Galilea dewade nla'awa Yesus pa nwakwak la totpena Yesus Nla ' a Kapernaum totpena Nhi ' a'nani de pa nkalwieda , yoma nhi'pa nmat wia .
Jesus therefore said to him , Unless you see signs and wonders , you will in no way believe . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la mak temni nhi ' de amni niwra , La'pa miy edonna mimkek ma'ta hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini pede riy ema rtaplelleltarga , de hota miy edonna mpiesiaya .
The nobleman said to him , Sir , come down before my child dies . ||| Keke'enku ' de amni niwra , Tuna , plet pa itla ' a , yanpa a a'nu nmati .
Jesus said to him , Go your way . Your son lives . The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him , and he went his way . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hyalia , mlia ' nek wa , o a'namu nkalwied olekwa . Noma riy de npesiay Yesus lirni de pede nla'awa .
As he was going down , his servants met him and reported , saying Your child lives ! ||| La'pa riy de ed ma'ta la talan letgara , dewade riy mak ktulla-kar lia e romni rma rwatroma pa rodia kot la riwra , Tuna a'nani nkalwied olekwa .
So he inquired of them the hour when he began to get better . They said therefore to him , Yesterday at the seventh hour , the fever left him . ||| Noma riy de natiana re niwra , Lera emkameni de a a'nu nkalwied wa ? Noma rwahla riwra , Wonyira la ' lera nwawuau ro'onni pukul satu .
So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said to him , Your son lives . He believed , as did his whole house . ||| Noma keke'en mak temni nhi ' de amni , nwahniorat nana la ' a ler de meman pa ed maka Yesus Nakot la e ' a Niwra , A'namu nkalwied olekwa . Dewade la ler de pa riy de nora romni mniotni honona rpesiay Yesus .
This is again the second sign that Jesus did , having come out of Judea into Galilee . ||| Hade ed maka Yesus Nhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini la ' re'eni wornu , la ' a Galilea , la ' ler maka Nwatiawua Yudea pa Nmai die .
After these things , there was a feast of the Jews , and Jesus went up to Jerusalem . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma la'pa nte'ela riy Yahudi lerlalawanni , noma Yesus Nla'awa la ' Yerusalem totpena Namuki-nahepur nohora ler kalwied de la ' hande .
Now in Jerusalem by the sheep gate , there is a pool , which is called in Hebrew , Bethesda , having five porches . ||| La ' Yerusalem nhiarni mak ha rweta la Duma Nhiarni , de gera tliwu kolam id etla hande . Ger de , ed maka ha rweta la ' a yawala Ibrani de riwra Betesda . La hande de roma nhieunu teras rumah wolima .
In these lay a great multitude of those who were sick , blind , lame , or paralyzed , waiting for the moving of the water , ||| La hande de riy harahu mak kamehra-kamau , de mak matni kyata , mak limni-lakni kloi , me mak kaliu'uta de nhi'inde e rdudu-rdera . Honona re e rwei ger mak katliw die nwo'la .
for an angel went down at certain times into the pool and stirred up the water . Whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was healed of whatever disease he had . ||| Yoma la ' lera dom de Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni nerun la gera tliw die nanpena nawo'la gerni . Ne la'pa mak kamehra mak kala ' ulu pa kler la gera tliw die , la'pa ger de nwo'la , hota riy nnienni hya ' to ' a mana , nmolu .
A certain man was there who had been sick for thirty-eight years . ||| Noma la ' gen die de muanke ' ida e naliu'ut nohora nnienni la ' a anni terampwotelu wehrani wo'awa .
When Jesus saw him lying there , and knew that he had been sick for a long time , he asked him , Do you want to be made well ? ||| Noma la'pa Yesus Namkek nana e nanina , ne Natga de e naliu'ut nohora nnienni la ' a mahnek memna , noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Oi , omuiwra mkialwieda me edonna ?
The sick man answered him , Sir , I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up , but while I 'm coming , another steps down before me . ||| Noma mak kamehra de nwalolla niwra , Amee ! La ' handi de a rimormio'ru hadamonna pa ntitni a lia gera tliw die ralamni totpena liernana ger de wnio'lani . Ne la'pa a ' g e uwrik pa giwra lier la gera tliw de , de ta'en nian meman pa aliernana , yoma rira rala ' ul muamaini a ' u .
Jesus said to him , Arise , take up your mat , and walk . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Emkade de mumat wa pa mpuopna u'tamu pa mula'awa !
Immediately , the man was made well , and took up his mat and walked . Now that day was a Sabbath . ||| Pa mtatan de nekpa nnienni de nmolu . Na'nama npopn u'tani pa nala'awa . La ' ler de ntai miemna la Sabat lerni maka Yahudi re edonna rkar lia de .
So the Jews said to him who was cured , It is the Sabbath . It is not lawful for you to carry the mat . ||| La ' hade pede o'ta-mata makden la Yahudi e rakot la mak nnienni na'nama kalwied de riwra , Oi ! Yana pleta-plet pa mpuopna u'tamu de pa mriana . O e muplinga de ler di de Sabat lerni pa yana riy rkar lia ? !
He answered them , He who made me well said to me , ‘ Take up your mat and walk . ' ||| Noma riy de nwalolla re niwra , Mere riy maka khi ' kalwieda a nnie'nu de , ed mak khopan pa apuopna u'tu pa a'ula'awa .
Then they asked him , Who is the man who said to you , ‘ Take up your mat and walk ' ? ||| He ' ed mak kparan pia khopna omriana o u'tamu pa mula ' a wa ?
But he who was healed did n't know who it was , for Jesus had withdrawn , a crowd being in the place . ||| Mere riy mak kalwied la nnienni de , e naplin niohor ma'ta riy maka khi ' kalwied e ' a nanni . Yoma Yesus edonna Nayamkek olek la ' riy mutlialawna re wa .
Afterward Jesus found him in the temple and said to him , Behold , you are made well . Sin no more , so that nothing worse happens to you . ||| Nhor nioma edon nalo'on wali ne Yesus Nwatrom nan riy della ' Uplerlawna roma kreini na'nama Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Mutlin rerio ! La ' dodo'ondi de omkialwied olekwa . Mere yan memmemna mhi ' do ' a-hal la inonmu . Yanhi'pa hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani pa hota nareh dioin nnienmu mak kala ' ulu die .
The man went away , and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well . ||| Noma riy de la ' meman wa , pa nla nakot nohor harella ' o'ta-mata Yahudi re niwra Yesus nanpena ed mak khi ' e ' pa kalwied la e nnienni-nhienni .
For this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus and sought to kill him , because he did these things on the Sabbath . ||| Pede Yahudi re o'tani-matni rhi ' yatyatni la Yesus , yoma ratga Yesus Nhi ' kalwieda riy nnienni la ' a ler maka riy Yahudi re yana rkar lia .
But Jesus answered them , My Father is still working , so I am working , too . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Yahudi re Niwra , A A'mu e Nkar pia nodi liarni me edonna Nrena . Ne A ' muana emkade wali .
For this cause therefore the Jews sought all the more to kill him , because he not only broke the Sabbath , but also called God his own Father , making himself equal with God . ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot emkade wa de yeher to ' a pa o'ta-mat Yahudi re riwra rwenna Yesus . Riwra rwenna Yesus , de edonan to'ola Nkar lia Sabat lerni , mere la walia yoma Yesus Niwra Uplerlawan de E Amni . Nnia'eratni de hota Eniwra E ' mana emekwalima Uplerlawna .
Jesus therefore answered them , Most certainly , I tell you , the Son can do nothing of himself , but what he sees the Father doing . For whatever things he does , these the Son also does likewise . ||| Yesus Nakot emkarilla ira niwra , Mpiesiayo ! Hota Uplerlawna A'nani A ' di , de edonna godi plolli pa ghi ' mak Agiwra ghi ' a . La'pa hya ' ed maka Aghi ' a de , de A'umkek nohora A A'mu Nhi ' hare . Yoma la'pa hya ' maka A A'mu Nhi ' a , de hota A ' muana tiolliohora re .
For the Father has affection for the Son , and shows him all things that he himself does . He will show him greater works than these , that you may marvel . ||| Yoma A A'mu Nhi ' kalwied mai A ' u , ne Ntut wualia hya ' to ' mak E Nhi ' reria mai A ' u . Me hota Entut wualia tulla-kniar mak kareh dioin la hihi ' a-yapyap miak kamehi-kayona mak Aghi ' a ri , pa hota yeher to ' pa mpier reria wapmi .
For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life , even so the Son also gives life to whom he desires . ||| Tulla-kniar mak kareh dioin de , de emkadi , de A A'mu de Namoria riy mak kmati ne Nala mormiori-dardiari plalahwa la ira . Ne hota emkade wal lia E A'nani A ' die , de gala mormiori plalahwa la ' he ' to ' a mak Agiwra gala la .
For the Father judges no one , but he has given all judgment to the Son , ||| A A'mu de nek de edonna Ntorna watghudi la rimormiori ida yoma plola-mneha honona de , Enal oleka la E A'nani A ' u .
that all may honor the Son , even as they honor the Father . He who does n't honor the Son does n't honor the Father who sent him . ||| A A'mu de Nhi ' hare honona totpena riy honona ratu rhu'ru-rhelam la A ' pua emekwalima ratu rhu'ru-rhelma la E ' a . Riy mak edonna khu'ru-khelam la A ' u , de hota edonna nhu'ru-nhelam pal lia A A'mu mak khopn A ' pua Amuai .
Most certainly I tell you , he who hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life , and does n't come into judgment , but has passed out of death into life . ||| A li'ru-tu'nu ri raplola , de la'pa riy mak katu katlina-katailla A li'ru , ne npesiaya A A'mu , mak khopn Amuai , de hota nmormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Hota edonna nlernana niukmu yoma matmiati edon nodi plolli owa'an la e ' a , mere enlernan oleka mormiori plalahwa .
Most certainly I tell you , the hour comes , and now is , when the dead will hear the Son of God 's voice , and those who hear will live . ||| Mpiesiaya ! Hota lerni-melli rwakrian wia me plollolli de ed olek di wa , de riy mak emeknekama rmati olekwa yoma edon rpesiay mia'ta , hota ratlin nana Uplerlawna A'nani A li'ru ne hota mak katlin la re rmormiori .
For as the Father has life in himself , even so he gave to the Son also to have life in himself . ||| Yoma A A'mu de mormiori onni-ga'arni inhatta pede Nhi ' walia A ' pua emkade wali , pa Alia ' walia mormiori onni-ga'arni inhatta .
He also gave him authority to execute judgment , because he is a son of man . ||| A A'mu de Nal A ' pua tiorna watghudi la rimormiori wawannu , yoma A ' die de maka ha rweta la Rimormiori A'na A ' u .
Do n't marvel at this , for the hour comes in which all who are in the tombs will hear his voice ||| Yana mpier rer wiapmi la A li'ru-tu'nu ri . Hota lerni-melli rmai wia de riy mak kmati oleka re ratlina A li'ru
and will come out , those who have done good , to the resurrection of life , and those who have done evil , to the resurrection of judgment . ||| dewade rlergot la hoini-kietarni ralamni . Ne la'pa riy meni mak khi ' samomuounu de hota ramat pa rmormior pia nodi liarni . Mere la'pa mak khi ' a yatyata-halala hota ramat pa rlernana niukamnu .
I can of myself do nothing . As I hear , I judge , and my judgment is righteous , because I do n't seek my own will , but the will of my Father who sent me . ||| Hya ' to ' maka Aghi ' a de , A ' g edonna liernohora A ralma-rior wamueh ' u . Atioran watghudi de A ' g e liernohor to ' a hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nakota . Ne Agetlia plol toto ' a la tatiaili pniarni me watghudi lokarni , yoma A ' g edonna liernohora a ralma-rior wamueh ' u mere Aliernohora A A'mu , mak khopn A ' u , ralma-riorni .
If I testify about myself , my witness is not valid . ||| Hota la'pa A orgah ' u ukot nohora A inon wamueh ' u , de hota mak ukota re riy id mana edonna npesiaya .
It is another who testifies about me . I know that the testimony which he testifies about me is true . ||| Mere la'pa Uplerlawna Enakot nohora A ' u pua rira ratlin nana , de Agatga de maka Nakot nohora la mai A die ha rpesiaya re .
You have sent to John , and he has testified to the truth . ||| Mere miy die mi'enyat wualia riy pa rla ratlin la Yohansi makharani lirni , ne Yohansi ed mak kakot nakot nohor olek A plolo'lu .
But the testimony which I receive is not from man . However , I say these things that you may be saved . ||| Mere mai A ' die , de A ' g edonna wuahaka rimormiori id pa rakot nohora mak Aghi ' a-yapi re , mere A'ukot nohora Yohansi lirni de tiy miy totpena miy er mak katlina , me mpiesiaya de , totpa hota Uplerlawna Namori-nalewan miy .
He was the burning and shining lamp , and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light . ||| Yohanis de emeknekama wa'du mak kmor pia morni nlipa-nka'ma la ' a Uplerlawna talanni mak kaplola , ne miy mieh ' a nek de ralammi kalwieda la mimkeka morni lipni-kailli de la ' ler ho'ke'eni .
But the testimony which I have is greater than that of John , for the works which the Father gave me to accomplish , the very works that I do , testify about me , that the Father has sent me . ||| Mere kniar maka A A'mu Nhopan pa A mua ghi ' ahorga di nareh dioinia Yohansi lirni maka enakot nohora A ' die . Ne kniar die entutga de A A'mu ed mak khopn A ' u .
The Father himself , who sent me , has testified about me . You have neither heard his voice at any time , nor seen his form . ||| Ne A A'mu mak khopna A ' mana Enakot nohora wali A ' u . Miy edonna mitlin ma'ta E lirni onde mimkeka E inonni .
You do n't have his word living in you , because you do n't believe him whom he sent . ||| Lirni-tunnu re mana edonna nawniatierun la miy ihrami ralamni , yoma miy edonna mpiesiay A ' u maka E orgahani Nhopan de .
You search the Scriptures , because you think that in them you have eternal life , and these are they which testify about me . ||| Miy mpial lia ' a-mpial miaiya Puka , yoma miy e miatniekame mhi ' emkade totpena mliernan talan mak kod miy lia mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Ne Puk de ho'mana e nakot nohor wali A ' u .
Yet you will not come to me , that you may have life . ||| Mere miy edonna mpiakriania A ' u , totpena mliernan mormiori plalahwa de .
I do n't receive glory from men . ||| A ' g edonna wuahaka ya'uli-yawedi la rimormiori nohkerna .
But I know you , that you do n't have God 's love in yourselves . ||| Mere Agat niohora miy . Agatga de mimikleha nhiol kalwied la ' Uplerlawna .
I have come in my Father 's name , and you do n't receive me . If another comes in his own name , you will receive him . ||| Amuai die agodia A A'mu plolli-mneheni , mere la ' hade ho'mana miy edonna mrieiniana A ' u . Mere la'pa riy meheni rmai pia rodia plol wamueheni demade miy miwa mrieiniana .
How can you believe , who receive glory from one another , and you do n't seek the glory that comes from the only God ? ||| La'pa mihak to ' a ya'uli-yawedmi mak kwatiawua mutwualmi , mere miy edonna mihak pa mliernan nan kalwieda la Uplerlawna memeh ' a inhatta , ta'en nian hota mpiesiay wali A ' u .
Do n't think that I will accuse you to the Father . There is one who accuses you , even Moses , on whom you have set your hope . ||| Mere yana mpiarora hota la ' lera id de A ' g ed mak kwaghal miy lia A A'mu gaini ralamni . Mere Musa maka miy mhia'ara aranmi la de , nanpena hota ed mak kwaghal miy .
For if you believed Moses , you would believe me , for he wrote about me . ||| Yoma Mus de nhorat tar wali A lia Puka ralamni . Hade emkade pede la'pa miy mpiesiay Musa lirni-tunnu de hota mpiesiay walia A li'ru-tu'nu .
But if you do n't believe his writings , how will you believe my words ? ||| Mere miy edonna mpiesiaya mak Musa ha nhorat taru re , pede hota emkameni la mpiesiaya A li'ru-tu'nu mak A'ukota ?
After these things , Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee , which is also called the Sea of Tiberias . ||| Noma la ' lera ida de Yesus Nleretia danau Galilea , maka nhi'inde ha rwet walia la danau Tiberias . Yesus Nte'ela danau de walli ,
A great multitude followed him , because they saw his signs which he did on those who were sick . ||| ne rirahu rlernohor reria , yoma ramkek lola hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka Enhi ' kalwied la riy mak kamehra-kamau totpa Ntutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini .
Jesus went up into the mountain , and he sat there with his disciples . ||| Noma Yesus Nha'at la wo'ora hananni na'nama Nor wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ramtatan wut lia hande .
Now the Passover , the feast of the Jews , was at hand . ||| La ' ler de , de nhi'pa nte'ela riy Yahudi lerlalawanni maka rweta la Paska .
Jesus therefore , lifting up his eyes and seeing that a great multitude was coming to him , said to Philip , Where are we to buy bread , that these may eat ? ||| Noma Yesus Nkillia walli-walli to ' de rirahu ema rlidan nan pa rmai wia . Noma Nakot la Pilipsu Niwra , Pilips ee ! Hota itawelia ya'ana-yemun la hanmeni totpena rimormior mutlialawna ri rre'ela ra'ana-remnu ?
He said this to test him , for he himself knew what he would do . ||| Yesus Nat oleka hota hya ' ed maka Niwa Nhi ' a mere Nakot emkade totpena Niwa na Nta'ga Pilipsu .
Philip answered him , Two hundred denarii worth of bread is not sufficient for them , that every one of them may receive a little . ||| Noma Pilipsu nakot la niwra , Ita'ala kupna-kai lia wolla wo'awa gahan memna pa itaweli roti demade itnakutla ho'mana , edonna ntu'tu !
One of his disciples , Andrew , Simon Peter 's brother , said to him , ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a id wali de mak kwawa Andarias , Simon Petrus hyalli , nakot la niwra ,
There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish , but what are these among so many ? ||| Tuna , mai handi de tuwari id enodia roti meha wolima , me i'na woru . Mere hare ho'mana edonna ntu'tu la riy mutlialawna re !
Jesus said , Have the people sit down . Now there was much grass in that place . So the men sat down , in number about five thousand . ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Mikot la hare honona pa ramtatna . Yoma la ' gen die de wewna kpauga harahu , pede rirahu rakperna la wewna wawannu . Rhor rrekan nana muanke ' a honona mak kden la hande de edonna nhal de a'na muanke ' a riy riwnu wolima , mere edon rhor wutga patke ' a rora upni-a'nani .
Jesus took the loaves , and having given thanks , he distributed to the disciples , and the disciples to those who were sitting down , likewise also of the fish as much as they desired . ||| Noma Yesus Na'ala rot die na'nama Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna , na'nama nhawi-nhawia rot diella ' riy mutlialawna re , na'nama Nal owa'an la i'n de pa nhakre'era la riy rahu re . Riy honona re ra'an pa rlernohora ir sukni .
When they were filled , he said to his disciples , Gather up the broken pieces which are left over , that nothing be lost . ||| La'pa ra'an pa rpeher wa na'nama Yesus Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Miwoka ya'ana-yemnu maka ha ra'ana atre ' a re , yanpa rhi ' a la gera niaini .
So they gathered them up , and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves , which were left over by those who had eaten . ||| La'pa rawok nana roti mak ha ra'an atre ' a re de rlernana kriou termida wehrani woru .
When therefore the people saw the sign which Jesus did , they said , This is truly the prophet who comes into the world . ||| La'pa riy mutlialawna re ramkek tutga Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni mak kamehi-kayona , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini de , noma riwra , Plola hadi de Makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru !
Jesus therefore , perceiving that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king , withdrew again to the mountain by himself . ||| Yesus Nat niohora iriwra rmai pia rtekua E ' pa Nla ' Ray lia ira , pede Yesus Nwatitin pa Nla'awa wo'ora hananni pa Nmemeh ' taru lia ' hande .
When evening came , his disciples went down to the sea . ||| La'pa lera niwa nmel wa , noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rerun la danau de .
They entered into the boat , and were going over the sea to Capernaum . It was now dark , and Jesus had not come to them . ||| Pa la'pa rha'at la puounu pa rleretia danau de pa rokria leta Kapernaum . Lera ntuinia wa , mere Yesus edonna Nden ma'ta la ira .
The sea was tossed by a great wind blowing . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne danau de nayo'ora yoma anin lawna nteni .
When therefore they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia , they saw Jesus walking on the sea and drawing near to the boat , and they were afraid . ||| La'pa rhopal pa olietni edonna nhal de kilu wolima onde wonema , pa rler la danau de letgarni dewade ramkek de Yesus Nma Nharan nana ir puounu de Nlola tah ' i ulti wawannu . Honona ramta'at wenna .
But he said to them , It is I . Do n't be afraid . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Ee ! Yan mimta'ata ! A ' g eda di !
They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat . Immediately the boat was at the land where they were going . ||| Noma rahepur pa rreiniana Yesus pa ror wutga la puou noma plin-plinnianama ira puounu de nton la leta maka rharan reria pnialgenni .
On the next day , the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there , except the one in which his disciples had embarked , and that Jesus had n't entered with his disciples into the boat , but his disciples had gone away alone . ||| La'pa repar wa dewade riy harahu mak kden ma'ta la danau walli de rma rwahaka Yesus yoma e rat niohora la ' a wonyir de puou ida nmeh ' a napnial lia hande . Ne ir ratga de maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re er mak kodia puou die , mere Yesus edon Ndella puou die wawannu pa hota emkade de Yesus etla meni ?
However , boats from Tiberias came near to the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks . ||| Nhor nioma riy dom rodi puou rwatiawua leta Tiberias pa rma rapniali de edon olieta la gen miaka wonyir de Itmatromni Yesus Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna nhor diewade Nal roti la riy mutlialawna re ra'ana .
When the multitude therefore saw that Jesus was n't there , nor his disciples , they themselves got into the boats and came to Capernaum , seeking Jesus . ||| La'pa riy mutlialawna re ramkek de Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re edonna rdella gen die , noma ir mana rha'at wal lia riy mak kwatiawua leta Tiberias puounu re pa rleretia danau de pa rla rahaka Yesus la leta Kapernaum .
When they found him on the other side of the sea , they asked him , Rabbi , when did you come here ? ||| La'pa irwatrom nana Yesus la ' a danau walli noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Am Tungkurga , mowenia omtie'ela handina ?
Jesus answered them , Most certainly I tell you , you seek me , not because you saw signs , but because you ate of the loaves and were filled . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Toto ' a ne , miy mihak A ' die de edonna riwra yoma miy mnia'erit nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini maka Aghi ' a re , mere mpiahak A ' die yoma mhiorat la ya'ana-yemnu mak kapeher miy .
Do n't work for the food which perishes , but for the food which remains to eternal life , which the Son of Man will give to you . For God the Father has sealed him . ||| Mere yana mipepe'el pa mpiahak to ' a yamanan maka plet pa nhor pua ngehpa . Mipepe'el pa mihaka ya'ana-yemnia mak edonna kgehpa , mak kodia mormiori-dardiar pa nodi liarni . Yamanan de , hota Rimormiori A'nani A ' die , de ed mak kal hade tiy miy . A A'mu Uplerlawna ed mak kala plola-mneha mai A ' u pa Aghi ' hade .
They said therefore to him , What must we do , that we may work the works of God ? ||| Noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Hota amhi ' a hya ' totpena nla ' nana Uplerlawna ralma-riorni ?
Jesus answered them , This is the work of God , that you believe in him whom he has sent . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Hadi ed mak Uplerlawna Nwahaka tiy miy , de totpena mpiesiay tioto ' memna A ' u maka Uplerlawna Nhopn Amuai die !
They said therefore to him , What then do you do for a sign , that we may see and believe you ? What work do you do ? ||| Noma riwra , La ' hade emkade de hota O ' nek de Mhi ' hya ' a pa amamkeka totpena ampesiay O ' a ?
Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness . As it is written , ‘ He gave them bread out of heaven to eat . ' ||| A up mamni-tgar mamni ra'ana yamanna maka ha rweta la manna , la ' a wo'orletna-kawurloini . E rhorat tar muemna la ' a hade la ' Puka ralamni riwra , Enala yamanan mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa ira'ana .
Jesus therefore said to them , Most certainly , I tell you , it was n't Moses who gave you the bread out of heaven , but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la ira Niwra , Mpiesiaya ! Musa edonna nala yamanan de , mere A A'mu . Ne E ' wal pia ed mak kala Yamanna inhatti mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha tiy miy .
For the bread of God is that which comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world . ||| Yoma Yamanna inhatta maka Uplerlawna Nal de , ed mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha de , ne Nerun totpa Nodia mormiori-dardiari plalahwa la mak kden la nohkerna wawannu .
They said therefore to him , Lord , always give us this bread . ||| Rakot la , Tuna , demade Mual mamain neka yamanan de mai am pia !
Jesus said to them , I am the bread of life . Whoever comes to me will not be hungry , and whoever believes in me will never be thirsty . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , A ' di de Yamanan de mak kodia mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni . Riy mak kmai A ' die de edonna rlernan yaplara pa nodi liarni . Ne mak kpesiay A ' die , hota tiernu edonna nkerna pa nodi liarni .
But I told you that you have seen me , and yet you do n't believe . ||| Mere emeknekama A'ukot oleka tiy miy wia , de miy e mimkek olek A ' u ho'mana miy edonna mpiesiaya .
All those whom the Father gives me will come to me . He who comes to me I will in no way throw out . ||| Mere riy honona mak A A'mu Nala mai A ' u , de hota plol toto ' pa rmai A ' die . Ne hota A ' g edonna wuayotlia riy meni to ' a mak kiwra kmai A ' die .
For I have come down from heaven , not to do my own will , but the will of him who sent me . ||| Yoma A ' di de Awuatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Agernu de A ' g edonna ghi ' hadom de Agodia A ralma-rior wamueh ' u . Mere Aliernohora Mak khopna A ' die ralma-riorni .
This is the will of my Father who sent me , that of all he has given to me I should lose nothing , but should raise him up at the last day . ||| Ne Mak khopn A ' die wniarorni , de totpena riy honona maka Nala mai A ' die , id mana hota edonna nler la matmiati-molmuolu pa nodi liarni , mere totpena A ' g ed mak kamori owa'an ir la ' a lera-mela noha niatni .
This is the will of the one who sent me , that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him should have eternal life , and I will raise him up at the last day . ||| Yoma hota plola la ' A'mu ralamni Nwahaka totpena la riy meni ed mak kna'erit nana A ' die E A'nani A ' u , me npesiaya , de hota nlernan mormiori-dardiari plalahwa ne hota A ' g ed maka kamori owa'an e ' la ' a ler noha niatni .
The Jews therefore murmured concerning him , because he said , I am the bread which came down out of heaven . ||| Dewade riy Yahudi kukunu-mamatia la Yesus yoma lirni Niwra , A ' die Yamanan mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Agernu .
They said , Is n't this Jesus , the son of Joseph , whose father and mother we know ? How then does he say , ‘ I have come down out of heaven ' ? ||| Pa idma nakot la ida riwra , Hota hadi de Yesus maka Yusup a'nani inhatta toh ? ! Inni-amni de itatga , ne hya ' nariei pia Eniwra Enwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Nernu ? !
Therefore Jesus answered them , Do n't murmur among yourselves . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Yana kukunu-mamatmi !
No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him , and I will raise him up in the last day . ||| Riy id mana hota edonna nmai A ' die la'pa A A'mu mak khopna Amuai edonna Nottiar hadella mai A ' u . Ne la'pa he ' ed mak kmai die hota A ' g ed mak kamoria hadella ' lera noha niatni .
It is written in the prophets , ‘ They will all be taught by God . ' Therefore everyone who hears from the Father and has learned , comes to me . ||| Etla la Puka makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni de e niwra , Uplerlawna hota Nwatutu-nwaye ' a ir honona . Ne riy honona maka A A'mu Nwatutu-nwaye ' a me iratlina-ratailla E lirni de hota rmai wiali A ' die .
Not that anyone has seen the Father , except he who is from God . He has seen the Father . ||| Mere wniatut die edonna ntutga riy de namkek oleka Uplerlawna . Eneknek to'ama A ' u mak kwatiawu Uplerlawan de ed mak kamkek oleka A A'mu de wa .
Most certainly , I tell you , he who believes in me has eternal life . ||| Mpiesiayo ! Riy makpesiay A ' die ed mak klernana mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
I am the bread of life . ||| A ' di de Yamanan mak kodia mormiori .
Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and they died . ||| Miy upmi-tgarmi ra'ana yamanna maka rweta la manna la ' a wo'orletna-kawurloini , mere emkade ho'mana rmat wiali .
This is the bread which comes down out of heaven , that anyone may eat of it and not die . ||| Mere la ' miy gaimi ralamni de Yamanan mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha inhatta eda di , ne he ' na'ana hade de hota edonna nmati .
I am the living bread which came down out of heaven . If anyone eats of this bread , he will live forever . Yes , the bread which I will give for the life of the world is my flesh . ||| A ' di de Yamanan maka kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha , Yamanan mak kodia mormiori inhatta . Riy meni mak ka'an nana Yamanan di , de hota nmormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Yamanan mak A'ukota di de A ih ' u-ra'ru inhatti , mak hota Agala la rimormiori nohkeran di rerieini totpa hota rlernana mormiori-dardiari .
The Jews therefore contended with one another , saying , How can this man give us his flesh to eat ? ||| La'pa ratlin tutga lir de , dewade riy Yahudi re idma nahuri-nawo'or la id wa . Pa idma nakot la ida riwra , Hota emkameni la riy di Nala ihini-rarni de pa ita'ana ?
Jesus therefore said to them , Most certainly I tell you , unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood , you do n't have life in yourselves . ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Pena mpiesiayo , la'pa miy edonna mi'ina Rimormiori A'na A ' die A ih ' u , ne miemn A ra'ru , de hota miy edonna mliernana mormiori plalahwa .
He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life , and I will raise him up at the last day . ||| Riy mak ka'ana A ih ' u me kemnia A ra'ru de hota nlernan mormiori plalahwa , ne A ' g ed mak kamoria la ' a lera noha niatni .
For my flesh is food indeed , and my blood is drink indeed . ||| Yoma a ih'ru-ra'ru de ya'ana-yemnu toto ' memna .
He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood lives in me , and I in him . ||| Riy mak ka'ana A ih ' u me kemni A ra'ru , de hota nor A die ihru ida-ralm ida .
As the living Father sent me , and I live because of the Father , so he who feeds on me will also live because of me . ||| A A'mu mak mormiori onni-ga'arni inhatta , hade ed mak khopna A ' u , ne A ' muana Amuori onnila E ' a . Emkade wal lia riy mak ka'ana A ih ' u me kemni A ra'ru , de hota Agala mormiori-dardiari plalahwa la ira .
This is the bread which came down out of heaven-not as our fathers ate the manna and died . He who eats this bread will live forever . ||| A ' die , de ed makla ' Yamanan mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha , mak ematia ' a yamanan manna maka upmi-tgarmi ha ra'ana re . Yoma la'pa ra'an nana ir yamananni de ho'mana , rmat wiali . Mere riy mak ka'an Yamanan di de hota nmormior plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
He said these things in the synagogue , as he taught in Capernaum . ||| Hare honona de Yesus Nwatutu-nwaye ' a momuoga , la ' a gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la ' leta Kapernaum .
Therefore many of his disciples , when they heard this , said , This is a hard saying ! Who can listen to it ? ||| La'pa ratlin nana Yesus lirni-tunnu re noma mak klernohor reri Yesus re harahu idma nakot la ida riwra , Wniatutu-wniaye ' di werat rehia ! Hota he ' ed maka kreiniana wniatutu rina ?
But Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this , said to them , Does this cause you to stumble ? ||| Yesus Nmeh ' a Nat niohora maklernohor reri harahu re idma e kukunu-mamatia la ida . Noma Nakot la , Yanpa hya ' maka A'ukota ri narieiniande miwenan mai A ' u ?
Then what if you would see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before ? ||| La'pa A'ukot emkade nek de miwenna , de hota emkameni owa'ana la'pa mimkek reria Rimormior A'nani A ' die gha'at owa'an la gen tiutullu ?
It is the spirit who gives life . The flesh profits nothing . The words that I speak to you are spirit , and are life . ||| Mak khi ' a rimormiori pa rmori , de Uplerlawna Nhiwni . Rimormiori rurni-laini die nakleha perkuna pa nodi mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de . Ne lira-tunu maka A ' g e ukota tiy miy ri , de Uplerlawna Nhiwni lirni-tunnu ne lira re er mak kodia mormiori-dardiari .
But there are some of you who do n't believe . For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who did n't believe , and who it was who would betray him . ||| Mere , miy mutwualmi dom nek de edonna rpesiaya . Yesus Nakot emkade yoma la ' a mulaliaini de Yesus Natga de hameni mak edonna kpesiaya me hameni mak hota ka'olga E ' a .
He said , For this cause I have said to you that no one can come to me , unless it is given to him by my Father . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'ana , La hade pede A'ukot oleka tiy miy giwra , hota riy id mana edonna nwakriani A ' u , atiaru me A A'mu ed mak ktulan la ir pa rmai .
At this , many of his disciples went back and walked no more with him . ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot emkade dewade maklernohor reri harahu re rhoitio'or doin Yesus wa .
Jesus said therefore to the twelve , You do n't also want to go away , do you ? ||| Noma Yesus Natiana maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a termida wehrani woru re Niwra , Yanpa miy miana e miwra mhioitio'or wal lia mai A ' u ?
Simon Peter answered him , Lord , to whom would we go ? You have the words of eternal life . ||| Noma Simon Petrus nakot la niwra , Matroma , hota amlernohora he ' owa'ana ? ! Matro'mu lirni nekane er mak kodi mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
We have come to believe and know that you are the Christ , the Son of the living God . ||| Ne ampesiay oleka O'owa , ne amatga de O inhatta Makakleha do ' a-hala mak Uplerlawna ed mak khopan pa muai .
Jesus answered them , Did n't I choose you , the twelve , and one of you is a devil ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Nee ! A orgah ' u ed mak kwalir niana riy termida wehrani woru miy . Mere hota la ' miy hononmi de hota la riy id de , nlernohora hegana amlawanni tototni-wudwiudni .
Now he spoke of Judas , the son of Simon Iscariot , for it was he who would betray him , being one of the twelve . ||| Mak Yesus Nakot de , de Yudas , Simon Iskariot a'nani . Yoma emkameni ho'mana Yudas de , nre ' temn olek la riy termida wehrani woru maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , mere hota e ' ed mak ka'olga Yesus .
After these things , Jesus was walking in Galilee , for he would n't walk in Judea , because the Jews sought to kill him . ||| La'pa nhor nioma Yesus Nalala ' a la ' Galilea . Yesus Nahmena Nla ' a Yudea , yoma makla ' Yahudi o'tani-matni la ' hande e rna'ohma pa rwen E ' a .
Now the feast of the Jews , the Feast of Booths , was at hand . ||| Mere la'pa nwakrian wia la ' lera yamuki-yahepru la Yahudi lerlalawanni maka nhi'inde ha rariria hoiwiali ,
His brothers therefore said to him , Depart from here and go into Judea , that your disciples also may see your works which you do . ||| noma Yesus amni-hyalli rakot la Yesus riwra , Yesus ee ! Yana Mdiella Galilea , Mai pia itla'awa Yudea , totpena riy harahu maklernohor rer O ' a re ramkek memna O hihi'imu-yapyapmu mak kamehi-kayona .
For no one does anything in secret while he seeks to be known openly . If you do these things , reveal yourself to the world . ||| Yoma hota riy mak kwahaka rimormiori ya'ulli-yawedni de hota edonna nade ' a-namoin nana hihi'ini-yapyapni . Pede la'pa Muatu Mhi ' nan hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona , de hota Mlia ' totpa noheri woru-lyanti nayanni ramkek nana .
For even his brothers did n't believe in him . ||| Rakot emkade yoma la ' amni-hyalli re , nek de edonna rpesiay E ' a .
Jesus therefore said to them , My time has not yet come , but your time is always ready . ||| Pede Yesus Nakot la re , Hyal miy re , edon nte ' ma'ta lera-mela maka Uplerlawna Ntutga pa hota Alia ' a . Mere la ' pa miy die , mlia ' a la lera-mela hya ' to ' a .
The world ca n't hate you , but it hates me , because I testify about it , that its works are evil . ||| La ' nohkeran di mniotni de hota edon rwayotil miy . Mere la ' A ' di de nohmarna mniotni nahmena-naprai A ' u , yoma nhi'inde A ' g e ukot nohor mamaini ira yatni-halli .
You go up to the feast . I am not yet going up to this feast , because my time is not yet fulfilled . ||| Mere la'pa miy die , de hota mlia ' pa mior wut lia riy pa mihe ' i-mihepru . Mere mai A ' die , A ' g edonna lia ' ma'ta , yoma lera-mela maka Uplerlawna Ntutga mai A ' u , edon nte ' ma'ta .
Having said these things to them , he stayed in Galilee . ||| Lirni emkade la ' a hyalli re , ne edonna Nwaran la Galilea .
But when his brothers had gone up to the feast , then he also went up , not publicly , but as it were in secret . ||| Mere la'pa amni-hyalli re rla rler teman la muki-hepur de noma lera woru-wotelu rtaw doinia na'nama Yesus Nmeh ' a Nla ' he ' i-hepru , mere riy id mana edonna nat niohora .
The Jews therefore sought him at the feast , and said , Where is he ? ||| La ' a muki-hepur de plahwani , de o'ta-mata Yahudi re rwahaka E ' riwra , Riy de etla hanmeni ?
There was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning him . Some said , He is a good man . Others said , Not so , but he leads the multitude astray . ||| Rirahu la mutlialawna re rapupu-raheria Yesus ha Nlolola . Dom de e riwra Hade samoga . Dom de riwra Hade yata , yoma Entota riy la klieratni .
Yet no one spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews . ||| Mere rwahaur de ramta'ata rwet la Yesus nanni totpena rira yana ratlin nana , yoma ramta'at rer lia Yahudi re o'tani-matni .
But when it was now the middle of the feast , Jesus went up into the temple and taught . ||| La'pa ertepartarlia yamuki-yahepru la ' a lera wotellu-wogatni la ' a lerlalawan de , dewade Yesus Nmai pia Nodi liarni la Uplerlawna roma kreini pa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a .
The Jews therefore marveled , saying , How does this man know letters , having never been educated ? ||| Yahudi o'tani-matni re honona rwer rer wiawni , yoma rwaror de riy di , edon Nlernan ma'ta krei-iskola agama re wniatutnu-wniaye'eni , pede emkameni pa Natu Nwatutu-nwaye ' a oleka pa emkade ?
Jesus therefore answered them , My teaching is not mine , but his who sent me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hya ' mak Awuatutu-wuaye ' a ri , de A wniatu'tu atia ' hare , mere Mak khopn A die wniatutnu hade .
If anyone desires to do his will , he will know about the teaching , whether it is from God or if I am speaking from myself . ||| Riy mak kiwra klernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , nanpena er mak kat niohora A wniatu'tu di nwatiawua Uplerlawna onde nwatiawu tio ' a A ralma-rior wamueh ' u .
He who speaks from himself seeks his own glory , but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true , and no unrighteousness is in him . ||| Riy meni mak knairia wniatut wamueheni , de nwahaka e nan wamueheni . Mere riy meni mak kwahaka Uplerlawna mak khopna e ' a , nan kalwiedni , de ha ndella ploloini-mneneheni . E ' edon npudi-nakla rira .
Did n't Moses give you the law , and yet none of you keeps the law ? Why do you seek to kill me ? ||| Miy e mliernan oleka Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni maka Musa nala tiy miy toh ? ! Mere riy id tiy miy miana edonna mitlina-mitail plollol la ' deulu-tatar de , yoma la'pa plol toto ' pa mliernohora deulu-tatar de , de hya ' a nrei pia miwra mpien A ' u ?
The multitude answered , You have a demon ! Who seeks to kill you ? ||| Noma rirahu riwra , Hegana-kawnu nhu ' r ralm O ' ee ! He ' ed mak kiwra kwen O ' a ?
Jesus answered them , I did one work and you all marvel because of it . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Eneknek to'ama Aghi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona id la ' Sabat lerni de , de mimpier rer wapmi yoma A ' g e kari la ' ler de .
Moses has given you circumcision not that it is of Moses , but of the fathers , and on the Sabbath you circumcise a boy . ||| Mere hota miy mieh ' a neka msiunat la ' a Sabat lerni totpena yana mpiera-mdiaitia deulu-tatra sunat maka Musa nal tiy miy . Ne sunat de nek de Musa deullu-tatarni atia ' walia hade , mere it upni-tgarni Abraham , Isak , me Yakopa deullu-tatarni .
If a boy receives circumcision on the Sabbath , that the law of Moses may not be broken , are you angry with me because I made a man completely healthy on the Sabbath ? ||| La'pa miy mhiur niohor riy pa rsunat keke'enku ' a la Sabat lerni totpena yana rpera-rdaitia Musa deullu-tatarni la ' a sunat , nihya'pa miwenan mai A ' u yoma Aghi ' kalwieda riy mak kamehra de pa inonni tetema nkalwieda la ' a Sabat lerni ? !
Do n't judge according to appearance , but judge righteous judgment . ||| Yana mniairia hya ' maka mimkeka onde mitlin to ' a pa mhiudi-mpiara A ' u mere mhiudi-mpiar de mliola plollolli-mneneheni .
Therefore some of them of Jerusalem said , Is n't this he whom they seek to kill ? ||| Dewade mak kden la Yerusalem dom de riwra , Yanpa Hadi ed maka ha rahak pa riwra rwenna ?
Behold , he speaks openly , and they say nothing to him . Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this is truly the Christ ? ||| Tamkek la Naltier die Nto'pi-ngaur to ' a maka Ha Nakotkota la ' a mutlialawna ralamni , ne riy id mana edonna npolliohor nan lirni . Yanpa it o'tani-matni re rat niohora oleka la ' hade de Ray Makamori-Kalewna inhatte ?
However , we know where this man comes from , but when the Christ comes , no one will know where he comes from . ||| Mere la'pa Ray Makamori-Kalewan de Nmai die hota riy id mana naplinga Ha Nwatiawu meni pa Nmai . Mere riy di genni-tienni de it tatga .
Jesus therefore cried out in the temple , teaching and saying , You both know me , and know where I am from . I have not come of myself , but he who sent me is true , whom you do n't know . ||| Yesus Nwatuttut rier mia'ta la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini , dewade Nhaun pa Niwra , Miy e mikota de miy miatga he ' A ' u me Awuatiawua la ' hanmeni pa Amuai . Mere A ' g edonna godia ralma-rior wamueh ' u pa Amuai , mere Uplerlawna ed mak khopan pa Amuai , de E ' ed mak ha rpesiaya . Mere miy die de edonna miatg Uplerlawna .
I know him , because I am from him , and he sent me . ||| Mere A ' die Agatga E ' a , yoma Awuatiawu E ' a , ne E nekpa ed mak khopna Amuai .
They sought therefore to take him , but no one laid a hand on him , because his hour had not yet come . ||| Yesus Nakot emkade de riy rwaror pa riwra rtorna wa mere riy id mana edonna nte'la la E ' a . Yoma edonna nte ' ma'ta la lerni maka Uplerlawna Ntutga oleka wa .
But of the multitude , many believed in him . They said , When the Christ comes , he wo n't do more signs than those which this man has done , will he ? ||| Ne rirahu la ' a nhiopnu-pniepan de na'nama rpesiay E ' a pa riwra , Plol toto ' a pa Ray Makamori-Kalewna eda di . Yoma la'pa Ray die Nmai , de hota hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka Nhi ' nan de edon nareh dioin maka riy di Nhi ' nan oleka re !
The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him , and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him . ||| Riy Parisi re ratlin nana rirahu e rapupu-raheria lir emkari la ' a Yesus , noma rla ' pa rora imam Yahudi o'tani-matni re rpolga mak katiaka Uplerlawna roma kreini me rhopan pa rla ' rtorna Yesus .
Then Jesus said , I will be with you a little while longer , then I go to him who sent me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la riy mutlialawna re Niwra , Hota la ' lera ho'ke'eni di nmeh ' a to ' pa Agora miy , nhor diewade A'uwali owa'an la ' E ' maka khopan pa muai .
You will seek me and wo n't find me . You ca n't come where I am . ||| Hota mimihak A ' u mere miy die edonna mpiatroma A ' u yoma hota ta'en niana mlia ' nan gen miaka Adiella .
The Jews therefore said among themselves , Where will this man go that we wo n't find him ? Will he go to the Dispersion among the Greeks and teach the Greeks ? ||| Noma o'ta-mata Yahudi idma natian ida , riwra , Hota riy di Niwra Nokur meni pede hota it edonna tlernana ? Yanpa Niwra la ' teman la riy Yahudi mak klaun la riy ornoha , totpena Nla Nwatutga riy Yahudi atia ' a la ' hande ?
What is this word that he said , ‘ You will seek me , and wo n't find me , ' and ‘ Where I am , you ca n't come ' ? ||| Hade Niwra hota itahaka E ' a , mere hota it edonna twatrom nana me hota taken niana itla ' a gen miaka Endella de ! Lirni re nnia'eratni hya ' a de ?
Now on the last and greatest day of the feast , Jesus stood and cried out , If anyone is thirsty , let him come to me and drink ! ||| Noma la'pa la'awa la ' ler maka rwewiei-rnarnar memna , de lera hohoni la ' lerlalawan de . Noma Yesus Ntutrieri na'nama Nhaunu pa Niwra , Riy maka tiernu kerna de nmai pia totpena Agalla nemnu .
He who believes in me , as the Scripture has said , from within him will flow rivers of living water . ||| La'pa hameni ed maka kpesiay A ' u , hota enlernana hya ' maka kahniorat tar la Puka ralamni de niwra , Hota nwatiawua riy de ihranu ralamni , de emeknekama ger ormata nwahi'da pa nwau liora mak kodia mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But he said this about the Spirit , which those believing in him were to receive . For the Holy Spirit was not yet given , because Jesus was n't yet glorified . ||| Yesus Nakot hade de Enakot nohora Uplerlawna Nhiwni mak hota riy maka kpesiay E ' a rlernana . Yoma la lera re de Uplerlawna Nhiwni edonna Nerun ma'ta yoma Yesus edon Narian ma'ta la heyanna pa Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi .
Many of the multitude therefore , when they heard these words , said , This is truly the prophet . ||| Rirahu ratlina-ratailia Yesus lirni-tunnu pa doma riwra , Matialo'onama Makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa nmai e inhatti !
Others said , This is the Christ . But some said , What , does the Christ come out of Galilee ? ||| Dom de riwra , Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru inhatti . Mere dom de edon rpesiaya pa riwra , Ray Makamori-Kalewan nek hadina ne nwatiawu Galilea liewnu ? !
Has n't the Scripture said that the Christ comes of the offspring of David , and from Bethlehem , the village where David was ? ||| La ' a Puka ralamni de niwra hota Ray Makamori-Kalewan de edon nwatiawua Galilea mere Daud duratni-waitni hade , pa hota Enwatiawua Betlehem pa nmai , yoma Daud nohoni-raini etla hande .
So a division arose in the multitude because of him . ||| La'awa hohoni dewade rirahu rawo'or nohora Yesus .
Some of them would have arrested him , but no one laid hands on him . ||| Dom de riwra rtorna , mere limni edonna rlok la inonni .
The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees , and they said to them , Why did n't you bring him ? ||| La ' hohoni dewade mak katiaka Uplerlawna roma kreini , maka rhopan pa rla rtorna Yesus , rawal wia . Noma imam-imam re o'tani-matni ror riy Parisi re ratiana re riwra , Nihya'pa miy edonna miodi Hade pa mmiai ?
The officers answered , No man ever spoke like this man ! ||| Noma maka ha rhopna re rwalolla riwra , Ami edonna matlin ma'ta riy raltier die emek E ' a !
The Pharisees therefore answered them , You are n't also led astray , are you ? ||| Noma Parisi re rakot la , Hoi ! Yanpa Enwotar nan olek miy wiali pa miy miana mlier la klieratni ?
Have any of the rulers or any of the Pharisees believed in him ? ||| Mimkek teka , la ' a o'ta-mata mak kodi plolli la mai ita me riy Parisi re , e rpesiaya riy de ?
But this multitude that does n't know the law is cursed . ||| Edonna toh ? ! Mere riy mutlialawna ri podaknu pa edonna rat niohora Musa deullu-tatarni . Ir rmeh ' a neka er mak kpesiaya . Ne hota ir nekane rlernana Uplerlawna niukamnu !
Nicodemus he who came to him by night , being one of them said to them , ||| La'pa riy Parisi id mak kden la hande nwawa Nikodemus , maka kmai olek la Yesus la ' ler dello ! Noma nakot la Parisi re korni niwra ,
Does our law judge a man unless it first hears from him personally and knows what he does ? ||| Ama-hyali miy re ! La ' a niukmu yala'ani plollolli de miala pa riy rwalol nohor pleini hihi'ini-yapyapni de nanpena mietlia niukamnu .
They answered him , Are you also from Galilee ? Search and see that no prophet has arisen out of Galilee . ||| Noma Parisi re rwohora-rtatra Nikodemus riwra , Hoi ! Yanpa riy podku-padku mak kwatiawua Galile ' id o ' a pa hota emekwali Yesus de . Hota mlia ' pa mpuahaka la ' Puka ralamni . Puka ralamni de edon riwra mak kden la Galilea hota rla ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu !
Everyone went to his own house , ||| La'pa rwahaur pa nhorwua noma honona rla'awa romni .
but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives . ||| Mere Yesus Nla'awa wo'ora Saitun .
Now very early in the morning , he came again into the temple , and all the people came to him . He sat down and taught them . ||| La'pa repar yawyawar ma'ta de Yesus Nla ' owa'an la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini , ne rirahu rma rahaka me rhopun reria . Noma Yesus Namtatna pa Nwatutga re .
The scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman taken in adultery . Having set her in the middle , ||| Nwatuttut rieri , noma makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama me riy Parisi rodia pat mak kaliai id pa rla ' a Yesus de . Noma rhopan pa pat mak kaliai die ntutrier lia letgara-mneneha . Pat de ed maka rtorna yoma nora muanke ' ida ralira-raliai rereri .
they told him , Teacher , we found this woman in adultery , in the very act . ||| Noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Tungkurga , amlernan pat di nalialiai rereri .
Now in our law , Moses commanded us to stone such women . What then do you say about her ? ||| Hota la ' a deulu-tatra Musa de pat maka emkade , de rwatliewria pa nmat miemna . Pa hota emkameni la Tuna wniarorni ?
They said this testing him , that they might have something to accuse him of . But Jesus stooped down and wrote on the ground with his finger . ||| Mere irakot nek emkade , totpena rna'ailia Yesus pa ra rwaghala . Mere Yesus Nru ' r rier tio'owa , ne Nal okarni na Nhorat la tani .
But when they continued asking him , he looked up and said to them , He who is without sin among you , let him throw the first stone at her . ||| La'pa roir reria , noma Yesus Ntutrieri pa Nakot la re Niwra , La ' miy di , de he ' nakleha do ' a-hala , de na'ala watu pa na nwa'al ulga pat de .
Again he stooped down and wrote on the ground with his finger . ||| Noma Yesus Nru ' g owa'an ne Nhort owa'an la tani .
They , when they heard it , being convicted by their conscience , went out one by one , beginning from the oldest , even to the last . Jesus was left alone with the woman where she was , in the middle . ||| La'pa ratlin nana Yesus Nakot emkade dewade honona rapi'ir lolol wa , de maka hamtoto'oni rala ' ulu na'nama tuwawiarni . Pa la'awa hohoni , dewade tamkek nan to ' a Yesus Nora patke ' de , rmemeh ' a la ' hande .
Jesus , standing up , saw her and said , Woman , where are your accusers ? Did no one condemn you ? ||| Noma Yesus Ntutrier owa'an pa Nakot la patke ' de Niwra , Ina , hare honona erla me ? Riy id mana edonna nukmu o ' a ?
She said , No one , Lord . Jesus said , Neither do I condemn you . Go your way . From now on , sin no more . ||| Noma pat de nwalolla niwra , Edonna Tuna . Noma Yesus Niwra , Demade hota A ' niek de , edonna gukum wali o ' a . Dodo'ondi de , mlia ' a nek wa , ne yana mpuehw owa'ana nhioli-lieta re .
Again , therefore , Jesus spoke to them , saying , I am the light of the world . He who follows me will not walk in the darkness , but will have the light of life . ||| La ' pa Yesus Naltier lia rirahu Niwra , A ' g ed mak karepar nana noha wawannu . Ne riy meni mak klernohor A ' u , de hota edonna nlol melmelli , mere nmormior lia ' lelerni mak kodia mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
The Pharisees therefore said to him , You testify about yourself . Your testimony is not valid . ||| Noma Parisi rakot la riwra , Dodo'ondi de O ' e mukot nohor inon wamuehemu ha nlolola pede lir maka Omukota re edonna rpesiaya .
Jesus answered them , Even if I testify about myself , my testimony is true , for I know where I came from , and where I am going , but you do n't know where I came from , or where I am going . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , La'pa Amueh ' a ukot nohora ino'nu ha lolola ho'mana , hya ' maka A'ukota de naplola . Yoma Agat niohora A ino'nu di , ha nwatiawu mueni , me hota A'uwal lia ' hanmeni . Mere miy e miplinga Awuatiawu hanmeni me hota Alia'awa la ' hanmeni .
You judge according to the flesh . I judge no one . ||| Miy e mtiorna watghudi de mliernohora rimormiori yehwani . A ' die edonna tiorna watghudi la rimormiori ida .
Even if I do judge , my judgment is true , for I am not alone , but I am with the Father who sent me . ||| Mere la'pa Atiorna watghudi la ' riy ida de Agukum riy id de edonna nhala , yoma A ' g edonna mueh ' a mere A ' g e gora A A'mu mak khopna A ' u am rewre'wa talla .
It 's also written in your law that the testimony of two people is valid . ||| La ' a miy deulu-tatar wamuehemi , de e rhorat targa la , La'pa mietla riy ida plolli-halli de riy woru onde narehi , e rtutrier nohora saksi .
I am one who testifies about myself , and the Father who sent me testifies about me . ||| Emkade pede mak kakot nohora Aliolola , de woru hade , de idni de A ' u , me wornu de A A'mu mak khopan pa Amuai .
They said therefore to him , Where is your Father ? Jesus answered , You know neither me nor my Father . If you knew me , you would know my Father also . ||| Noma ratiana Yesus riwra , Hota Ammu de etla hanmeni ? Noma Niwra , Miy edonna miatg A ' u onde A A'mu . Yoma la'pa miy miatg A ' u , de emekwalima miy miatga A A'mu wali .
Jesus spoke these words in the treasury , as he taught in the temple . Yet no one arrested him , because his hour had not yet come . ||| Yesus Nwatut niohora hare honona de la ' a kah kupan genni onni la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini . Mere la ' riy id mana edonna ntorna Yesus yoma edonna nte ' ma'ta la lerni-melli .
Jesus said therefore again to them , I am going away , and you will seek me , and you will die in your sins . Where I go , you ca n't come . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'an la ' ira , Hota Alia'awa , ne mihaka A ' u ho'mana hota miy edonna mliernana A ge'nu , mere hota mmiat lia do'omi-halmi ralamni .
The Jews therefore said , Will he kill himself , because he says , ‘ Where I am going , you ca n't come ' ? ||| Pede makla ' a o'ta-mat la Yahudi idma ratian ida , Yanpa Ha Niwra Nwen inonni yoma Eniwra la ' a gen miaka Enla ' de it edonna tlernohora .
He said to them , You are from beneath . I am from above . You are of this world . I am not of this world . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'an la ira Niwra , Mimpiatiaw yawa , de la ' a nohkeran di wawannu . Mere A ' die edonna . Awuatiawua heyanna .
I said therefore to you that you will die in your sins , for unless you believe that I am he , you will die in your sins . ||| La ' hade pede A'ukot olek tiy miy , hota miy mmiat lia do'omi-halmi ralamni . Yoma la'pa miy edonna mpiesiay A ' die E ' inhatta maka A'ukot oleka tiy miy , hota plol toto ' a pa mmiat lia do'omi-halmi ralamni .
They said therefore to him , Who are you ? Jesus said to them , Just what I have been saying to you from the beginning . ||| Noma ratiana Yesus riwra , Hota plollolli de he ' O ' a ? Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , A ' g ed maka nhi'inde A'ukot oleka tiy miy wia !
I have many things to speak and to judge concerning you . However , he who sent me is true , and the things which I heard from him , these I say to the world . ||| Harahu maka Agiwra ukota tiy miy totpa Agetlia halmi re . Mere hota A ' g edon liernohora A ralma-rior wamueh ' u . Mak khopan pa Amuai die lirni-tunnu ed maka kden la plol wawna . Ne A'ukot nohora la ' a nohkerna mniotni re , la ' a hya ' mak A'utlin nana la E ' a .
They did n't understand that he spoke to them about the Father . ||| Makden Yahudi re raplin niohora ma'ta E yaltierni della ira , de Enakot nohora Amni Uplerlawna .
Jesus therefore said to them , When you have lifted up the Son of Man , then you will know that I am he , and I do nothing of myself , but as my Father taught me , I say these things . ||| La hade pede Yesus Nakot la ira , Niwra , Hota la ' miy er mak kariei piede Rimormiori A'na A ' die urian la heyanna . Ne la ' ler de nanpena miatga de A ' g inhatta , maka ukot olek tiy miy , ne hota miat wualia de hya ' mak Aghi ' a re , de A ralma-rior wamueh ' u atia ' a . Hya ' maka ukota re de A A'mu e Nwatut niana noma Aliernohora .
He who sent me is with me . The Father has n't left me alone , for I always do the things that are pleasing to him . ||| Ne E ' ed mak khopn A ' u . E edonna Naltarga Amueh ' a mere Nor A ' tialla yoma nhi'inde Aliernohora E ralma-riorni .
As he spoke these things , many believed in him . ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot hare honona de nek de rirahu rpesiaya .
Jesus therefore said to those Jews who had believed him , If you remain in my word , then you are truly my disciples . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la riy Yahudi mak kpesiay E ' a re Niwra , La'pa mliernohor reria A wniatu'tu-wniaye ' u , de hota plol toto ' pa mpiali olek la maklernohor reri A ' u inhatta .
You will know the truth , and the truth will make you free . ||| Ne la'pa emkade de hota miat niohor hya ' ed mak kaplola pa narieiniande rwe'er doin miy lia wutwutu-kokgohomi .
They answered him , We are Abraham 's offspring , and have never been in bondage to anyone . How do you say , ‘ You will be made free ' ? ||| Noma rakot la Yesus riwra , Am di de Abraham duratni ami . La ' ululu meman pa la'pa ntutu-nte'ela dodo'ondi , de riy edonna rodi plolli mai ami ! Pa hota emkameni pa Omukota Miwra hota rwe'er doin am lia wutwutu-kokgoh mamni ?
Jesus answered them , Most certainly I tell you , everyone who commits sin is the bondservant of sin . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla Niwra , Plola la ' a A li'ru ri . La'pa riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala de nwal lia do ' a-hala atni-wa'arni .
A bondservant does n't live in the house forever . A son remains forever . ||| Pede mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala ida de emeknekama ata-wa'ara ida mak kakleha gen temtemna . Mere la'pa nwal lia a'na raralma ida , de namtemteman la genni pa nodi liarni .
If therefore the Son makes you free , you will be free indeed . ||| La hade pede la'pa Uplerlawna A'nani A ' die Awue'er doin olek miy lia do ' a-hala , de hota toto ' meman pa rwe'er doin olek miy wia .
I know that you are Abraham 's offspring , yet you seek to kill me , because my word finds no place in you . ||| Plola , Agat niohora miy di de Abrahama duratni-waitni . Mere miy miwra mpien A ' u , yoma mihmena mrieiniana A wniatu'tu-wniaye ' u .
I say the things which I have seen with my Father , and you also do the things which you have seen with your father . ||| Hya ' maka A'umkeka la A A'mu , de hade ed mak A'ukota . Mere miy di de mliernana wniatutu-wniaye ' a la miy ammi .
They answered him , Our father is Abraham . Jesus said to them , If you were Abraham 's children , you would do the works of Abraham . ||| Noma rwahla Yesus lirni riwra , A am mamni de Abrahama . Mere Yesus Nwahla , La'pa miy ammi toto ' a Abraham , de hota mtiolliohora hya ' maka Abraham ha nhi ' a .
But now you seek to kill me , a man who has told you the truth which I heard from God . Abraham did n't do this . ||| Mere A'uno ' miy lia hya ' mak kaplola maka A'utlina la Uplerlawna , mere miy miwra mpien A ' u . Abraham edonna nhi ' mak emkare .
You do the works of your father . They said to him , We were not born of sexual immorality . We have one Father , God . ||| Mere miy nhiolmi-lietmi hihi'imi-yapyapmi rlernohora miy ammi dom to ' a . Noma rwahla Yesus lirni riwra , Am di de a'na let atia ' ami . A am mamni de Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a .
Therefore Jesus said to them , If God were your father , you would love me , for I came out and have come from God . For I have n't come of myself , but he sent me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re , La'pa plola la miy ammi Uplerlawna , de hota miy mhi ' kalwiedwed A ' u yoma A ' di de Awuatiawu E ' a . A ' g edonna godia A ralma-rior wamueh ' u pa Amuai . Mere E ' ed maka khopan pa Amuai .
Why do n't you understand my speech ? Because you ca n't hear my word . ||| Hya ' a nariei piede miy edonna mnia'erit nana A'ukotkota ? Yoma mihmena mrieiniana A wniatu'tu-wniaye ' u .
You are of your father the devil , and you want to do the desires of your father . He was a murderer from the beginning , and does n't stand in the truth , because there is no truth in him . When he speaks a lie , he speaks on his own , for he is a liar , and the father of lies . ||| Miy ammi de hegana amlawanni , ne hota mliernohora ha ralma-riorni . Yoma hegan de yehwani de la ' ululu meman pa ntutu-nte'ela lera-mela ri , nwunu-nwenan mamaini . Ne la ' walia Enputra-npalka , na'ohpa-nalahara yoma edon nden etia la plol wawna . Ohpa-lahara re honona rwatiawua e ' a pede la'pa ena'ohpa-nalahara de nlernohor neka e yehwa wamueheni inhatta .
But because I tell the truth , you do n't believe me . ||| Mere A ' di de ukot nohora mak kaplola , hade pede miy edonna mpiesiay A ' u .
Which of you convicts me of sin ? If I tell the truth , why do you not believe me ? ||| La ' miy hononmi de riy id mana ta'en niana nakot nohor A do ' a-ha'lu . Ne la'pa A'ukot nohora mak kaplola , de hya ' nrei piede miy edonna mpiesiay A ' u ?
He who is of God hears the words of God . For this cause you do n't hear , because you are not of God . ||| Riy mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna , de natlin la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Mere miy di de edonna mpiatiawua Uplerlawna pede mihmena mitlina-mitailla .
Then the Jews answered him , Do n't we say well that you are a Samaritan , and have a demon ? ||| Noma riy Yahudi re rakot la Yesus riwra , Hoi ! Maka amakot oleka de O ' de makdena Samaria id O ' a , ne hegana e nhu'ru ralm O ' a , a lir mamni re naplollola !
Jesus answered , I do n't have a demon , but I honor my Father and you dishonor me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hegana edonna rhu'ru ralm A ' u . Mere A ' g ghu'ru-ghelam la A A'mu mere miy e mipolu-miliell A ' u .
But I do n't seek my own glory . There is one who seeks and judges . ||| A ' g edonna uhaka riy pa ra'uli-rawedi A ' u . Mere Riy id ed ma'ta la mak kwahak pa ra'uli-rawedi A ' u , ne E ' ed mak ktorna watghudi .
Most certainly , I tell you , if a person keeps my word , he will never see death . ||| A li'ru ri plola , de la'pa riy mak katlin mai A ' u , de hota edonna nmati ne nmormior pia nodi liarni !
Then the Jews said to him , Now we know that you have a demon . Abraham died , as did the prophets , and you say , ‘ If a man keeps my word , he will never taste of death . ' ||| Noma riy Yahudi re rakot la Yesus riwra , Ami e matlina O lirmu ri la ' dodo'ondi , de amatga de plol toto ' a la hegana e nhu'ru ralm O ' a . Abraham nek de nmati , emkade walia makwohorulu-ktatrulu re honona . Mere O lirmu niwra riy mak klernohora O lirmu , de hota edonna nmati .
Are you greater than our father Abraham , who died ? The prophets died . Who do you make yourself out to be ? ||| La'pa Abrahama , nek de nmati olekwa , ne makwohorulu-ktatrulu mana rmati olekwa , ne hota hya ' owa'an O ' a ? Ah , O ' di de taken niana inponmu narehia a am mamni Abrahama !
Jesus answered , If I glorify myself , my glory is nothing . It is my Father who glorifies me , of whom you say that he is our God . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La'pa A orgah ' u uhaka riy rhu'ru-rhelm A ' u de hota nhiu'ru-nhielam de nakleh weli . Mere A A'mu maka miy miwra miy Uplerlawanmi nek de ed mak kwak pa rimormiori rhu'ru-rhelm A ' u .
You have not known him , but I know him . If I said , ‘ I do n't know him , ' I would be like you , a liar . But I know him and keep his word . ||| Mere plollolli de miy niek de edonna miatga E ' a . Mere A ' di nanpena ed mak kat niohora E ' a . La'pa Agiwra A ' g edonna gatg E ' a , nnia'eratni A ' g ulahara , pa emekwali miy e mhi ' nana . Mere plollolli de Agat niohora memna E ' a me Aliernohora E lirni-tunnu .
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day . He saw it and was glad . ||| Ne la ' walia miy ammi Abraham niwra namkek memna A le'ru-me'lu me ralamni nahepuepur nohora . Meman neka de enamkek oleka A ' wua ne ralamni kalwieda !
The Jews therefore said to him , You are not yet fifty years old ! Have you seen Abraham ? ||| Noma riy Yahudi rakot la Yesus riwra , Omhuol niana nohkerna wawannu de edonna nla ' ma'ta anni terampwolima , ne omumkek oleka Abrahama ? !
Jesus said to them , Most certainly , I tell you , before Abraham came into existence , I AM . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Plola la A li'ru ri . La ' ler Abraham inni edonna ntor ma'ta Abrahama la nohkerna wawannu di de A ' inhatti A ' g ed olek la wa .
Therefore they took up stones to throw at him , but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple , having gone through the middle of them , and so passed by . ||| Dewade riy Yahudi re ra'ala watu pa riwra ra rwa'ala yoma la ' E lirni emkade de emeknekama Niwra Uplerlawna E ' a , mere Yesus Nade ' a pa Nhoitio'or la Uplerlawna roma kreini pa Nla'awa .
As he passed by , he saw a man blind from birth . ||| La'pa Yesus Nalala ' reri ne Namkek nana muanke ' ida mak matni kyat meman la apun ralma .
His disciples asked him , Rabbi , who sinned , this man or his parents , that he was born blind ? ||| Noma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ratiana riwra , Tungkurga , nihya'pa ha inni ntor hade de matni niat memna ? Yanpa e do'oni-halli onde inni-amni do'oni-halli ?
Jesus answered , This man did n't sin , nor did his parents , but that the works of God might be revealed in him . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Ha matni niat de , ha do'oni-halli edon nariei , onde inni-amni do'oni-halli , mere hade emkade totpena riy ramkek memna Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni la e inonni .
I must work the works of him who sent me while it is day . The night is coming , when no one can work . ||| La'pa Amuormior mia'ta , de emeknekama lera ed ma'ta pa it tkarkiar reria Mak khopn A ' die kniarni . Yoma hota mela nma ndamt ita , pa nhi'nande riy id mana edonna nkari .
While I am in the world , I am the light of the world . ||| Pa la'pa A ' g e muormior mia'ta la nohkeran di wawannu , de Aghi ' hitita-reprepar la noh di wawannu .
When he had said this , he spat on the ground , made mud with the saliva , anointed the blind man 's eyes with the mud , ||| La'pa Nakot emkade noma Nakrui lia tani , na'nama Nkoiri-nwalia pa Noha la riy de matni .
and said to him , Go , wash in the pool of Siloam which means Sent . So he went away , washed , and came back seeing . ||| Noma Nakot la riy de Niwra , Mlia ' pa mura'ru la gera tliwu kolam Siloam . Yoma Siloam de nnia'eratni de Mak Ha Nhopan pa Nmai . Pede riy de la'pa nararga gaini . Noma nawal lia romni de matni namkek olek wa .
Therefore the neighbors and those who saw that he was blind before said , Is n't this he who sat and begged ? ||| Noma e rom heiwialli re rora riy mak nhi'inde ramkek nande nmeh ' a nawakwaka re riwra , Yanpa hade ed mak nhi'inde kawiatur targa pa nmeh ' a nawakwak dena ?
Others were saying , It is he . Still others were saying , He looks like him . He said , I am he . ||| Ne la ' dom de riwra , Riy de inhatta . Mere la ' dom de riwra , Hade edonna . Mere gaini nhi'pa ramneh wa . Mere orgahani niwra , A ' g inhatta !
They therefore were asking him , How were your eyes opened ? ||| La ' emkameni pede o matmu de namkeka ?
He answered , A man called Jesus made mud , anointed my eyes , and said to me , ‘ Go to the pool of Siloam and wash. ' So I went away and washed , and I received sight . ||| Noma nakot la re niwra , Riy maka nanni Yesus de ed mak Nkoiri-nwalia tani pa noha la ma'tu na'nama Nhopan pa a lia urarga a ga'yu la gera tliwu Siloam . Noma alia'awa pa a'urarga a ga'yu pa a ma'tu naphyar wia .
Then they asked him , Where is he ? He said , I do n't know . ||| Noma ratiana riwra , Riy de etla meni ? Noma nwalolla niwra , A'uplinga .
They brought him who had been blind to the Pharisees . It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes . ||| La ' ler maka Yesus Nala kruini na Nawoh ' a tani pa Nhi ' kalwieda riy mak matni kyat de , ntai mdududga Sabat lerni maka Yahudi re yana rkar lia de . Dewade irodia riy mak dodo'ona matni kyat de la riy Parisi .
Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received his sight . He said to them , He put mud on my eyes , I washed , and I see . ||| La ' noma Parisi re ratian nohora mak matni kalwied olek de riwra , La'pa emkameni pede o matmu naphyar wia ? Noma nwalolla niwra , Riy ida Na'ala tani mak Nkoiri-nwal die na'nama Noha la ma'tu me nhor nioma a lia urar dioinia a ga'yu dewade a ma'tu ramkek meman wa .
Some therefore of the Pharisees said , This man is not from God , because he does n't keep the Sabbath . Others said , How can a man who is a sinner do such signs ? So there was division among them . ||| Mere riy Parisi re dom riwra , Mak khi ' kalwieda ha matni di , hade edonna Nwatiawua Uplerlawna yoma edonna Nhu'ru-nhelma la ' a Sabat lerni . Mere dom de riwra , Mere taken niana riy mak khi ' do ' a-hala rhi ' a-ryapia hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , mak emkade ! Noma honona re hururi-wowo'ora .
Therefore they asked the blind man again , What do you say about him , because he opened your eyes ? He said , He is a prophet . ||| Noma riy Parisi re ratian owa'ana riy de riwra , O ' nek de ed mak kler la kalwiedni . Pede mukot teka , hota emkameni la o wniarormu la riy mak khi ' o matmu pa kalwied dena ? Noma niwra , Agatga de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id hade .
The Jews therefore did n't believe concerning him , that he had been blind and had received his sight , until they called the parents of him who had received his sight , ||| Mere makhi ' a o'ta-mat la Yahudi re rahmena rpesiaya de ululu de riy de matni niata mere dodo'ondi de namkek olekwa . La ' hade pede la'pa rhopan pa rla rpolga riy de inni-amni .
and asked them , Is this your son , whom you say was born blind ? How then does he now see ? ||| Noma ratian nohora , Plola a'nami di de mak miwra ha nmor niohora mat yatni ? Ne emkameni pede dodo'ondi de matni nkalwied wa ?
His parents answered them , We know that this is our son , and that he was born blind , ||| Noma inni-amni riwra , Plola a a'na mamni hadi , ne ha matni niat la ' a apun ralam memna .
but how he now sees , we do n't know , or who opened his eyes , we do n't know . He is of age . Ask him . He will speak for himself . ||| Mere la ' a hya ' a nrei piede dodo'ondi de matni nkalwied wa , ami e maplinga . Ne he ' ed mak khi ' kalwieda ha matni pa namkek wa , hade nek de ami e maplinga . Mitian neka e orgahi wa . Ha tuwnu nkern olekwa pa hota orgahi pen neka nwahauria .
His parents said these things because they feared the Jews , for the Jews had already agreed that if any man would confess him as Christ , he would be put out of the synagogue . ||| Inni-amni rakot emkade yoma ratga de he ' to ' a maka kwayow nohora Yesus Niwra Yesus de Ray Makamori-Kalewna , hota Yahudi o'tani-matni rlarn ir pa rler owa'an la roma-lewu miaka nhi'inde Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli .
Therefore his parents said , He is of age . Ask him . ||| La ' hade pede riy de inni-amni riwra , Ha nlawn olekwa pa mitian nek orgahi wa .
So they called the man who was blind a second time , and said to him , Give glory to God . We know that this man is a sinner . ||| Noma rpolg owa'ana riy maka dodo'ona matni kyat de pa ratian owa'ana riwra , Mliokar memna , totpena yana mulahara , yoma amatga mak kaphyaria o matmu de , mak khi ' do ' a-hala hade .
He therefore answered , I do n't know if he is a sinner . One thing I do know , that though I was blind , now I see . ||| Ha Nhi ' a do ' a-hala me edonna , de a'uplinga . Mere maka agatga de , de ululu de a ma'tu yata mere dodo'ondi de a ' g e umkek olekwa !
They said to him again , What did he do to you ? How did he open your eyes ? ||| Noma rakot owa'an la riwra , Enhi ' a hya ' tiy o ' a pede o matmu re raphyari ?
He answered them , I told you already , and you did n't listen . Why do you want to hear it again ? You do n't also want to become his disciples , do you ? ||| Noma riy de nakot la re niwra , A'ukot oleka honona tiy miy wia mere mihmena mitlina . Hya ' nariei pia miwra mitlin owa'ana ? Yanpa miwra mliernohor wali E ' a ?
They insulted him and said , You are his disciple , but we are disciples of Moses . ||| Dewade honona rapolu-raliella riy de pa rakot la , Hoi ! O ' ed mak klernohora E ' a . Am die edonna . Amlernohor to ' Musa .
We know that God has spoken to Moses . But as for this man , we do n't know where he comes from . ||| Amatga de Uplerlawna Naltieri olek la Mus wa . Mere la riy de , ami e maplin niohora Ha Nwatiawu meni pa Nmai !
The man answered them , How amazing ! You do n't know where he comes from , yet he opened my eyes . ||| Noma riy de nakot la re , Ah ! A ' g edon nia'erit nan miy ralma-riormi ! Yoma plollolli de mimkek oleka Enhi ' a ma'tu pa rkalwieda mere mitian nohor ma'ta Ha Nwatiawu hameni pa Nmai ? !
We know that God does n't listen to sinners , but if anyone is a worshiper of God and does his will , he listens to him . ||| Itatga de Uplerlawna edonna ntail nohora mak khi ' do ' a-hala , eneknek to'ama riy mak khu'ru-khelam la Uplerlawna pa nlernohora E ralma-riorni .
Since the world began it has never been heard of that anyone opened the eyes of someone born blind . ||| La ' ululu ma'ta la ' noha knieranni , de edonna ratlin ma'ta riy maka matni kyat la apun ralma de riy rhi ' a pa nkalwieda .
If this man were not from God , he could do nothing . ||| La'pa riy de edonna Nwatiawu Uplerlawna , de taken niana Nhi ' hare honona .
They answered him , You were altogether born in sins , and do you teach us ? Then they threw him out . ||| Noma Parisi riwra , O ' di de mak penpuen lia do ' a-hala la ' lera inmu ha nayoria o ' de , pa hota emkameni pa omuiwra mpuatutg ami ? ! Dewade la ' ler de meman pa rlarna e ' pa yana nmai owa'an la gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli .
Jesus heard that they had thrown him out , and finding him , he said , Do you believe in the Son of God ? ||| La'pa Yesus Natlin nande rlarn oleka riy della gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli . Noma Yesus Nwahaka riy de pa Nakot la Niwra , O e mpuesiaya Rimormiori A'nani de me edonna ?
He answered , Who is he , Lord , that I may believe in him ? ||| Noma riy de niwra , Tuna , he ' hade pede ? Mtiulan pa Mukot a ' u totpena apuesiaya .
Jesus said to him , You have both seen him , and it is he who speaks with you . ||| Omumkek olek E'ewa . E ed mak e Nor o pa kaltier di !
He said , Lord , I believe ! and he worshiped him . ||| Apuesiay O ' a Matroma ! Dewade nru ' pua ntuk lia Yesus gaini ralamni .
Jesus said , I came into this world for judgment , that those who do n't see may see , and that those who see may become blind . ||| Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Amuai lia nohkeran di wawannu totpena Atiutga he ' ed mak kaplola me he ' ed mak khala . Atiutga talan la riy mak kaplin niohora Uplerlawna , pa emolmolan nekama Aghi ' mak matni kyata pa ramkek memna . Mere riy mak kiwra ir inon wamueheni rat niohora oleka Uplerlawna , de hota yeher to ' pa rler la melmelli-kalkalamni pa emeknekama mak matni kamkeka de mak kwaldioinia pa rwaho ' a-rwahai .
Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things , and said to him , Are we also blind ? ||| La'pa riy Parisi mak kden la hande doma ratlin nana Yesus Nakot emkade noma ratiana Yesus riwra , La ' O ralma-riormu de ami e maplin niohora Uplerlawna pa emekwalima mak matni yat wali ? !
Jesus said to them , If you were blind , you would have no sin , but now you say , ‘ We see . ' Therefore your sin remains . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , La'pa mpiayow nohora de miy matmi niata , de Uplerlawna edon Nwaghal miy . Mere yoma mikot la miwra mimkeka me miatga , hade nnia'eratni de miy er ma'ta la do ' a-hala wawannu .
Most certainly , I tell you , one who does n't enter by the door into the sheep fold , but climbs up some other way , is a thief and a robber . But one who enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep . ||| Mitlin rer lia A li'ru mak kaplollola ri ! La'pa riy meni mak klola lutru ktema pa kler la duma riokni ralamni , de makwuri-makgalmua hade . Mere riy maka kmai pia klola nhiari , de makodi duma inhatta .
The gatekeeper opens the gate for him , and the sheep listen to his voice . He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out . ||| Mak katiaka riokni nhiarni , nhari nhiari la makodi duma inhat de , ne pipni-dumni re rlernohora makodi duma die yoma ir rakniau reria matromni lirni . Enpolu nenenna nanni pa nodgiota re .
Whenever he brings out his own sheep , he goes before them , and the sheep follow him , for they know his voice . ||| La'pa rodgiota pipni-dumni dewade makodi duma inhat de nala ' ulu nampena pipni-dumni rlernohor reria , yoma duma re rakniau reria lirni .
They will by no means follow a stranger , but will flee from him , for they do n't know the voice of strangers . ||| Hota ir edonna rlernohora riy meheni , mere rawlar dioin la la'pa edon rakniau reria riy de lirni .
Jesus spoke this parable to them , but they did n't understand what he was telling them . ||| Yesus Nakot nohora lira yawalliohor de , mere ir edonna rna'erit nana Yesus ha nakotkota .
Jesus therefore said to them again , Most certainly , I tell you , I am the sheep 's door . ||| La ' hade pede Yesus Nakot lira ralamni owa'an la ira niwra , Plola la A li'ru ri . A ' di de emeknekama duma riokni nhiarni .
All who came before me are thieves and robbers , but the sheep did n't listen to them . ||| He ' to ' a mak kala ' ul A ' u totpa rwal lia makodi duma mere edon raplola re , de emeknekama makwuri-kgalmu irhatta . Mere hota pipi-duma re edon rlernohora et miemna ir lirni-tunnu .
I am the door . If anyone enters in by me , he will be saved , and will go in and go out and will find pasture . ||| A ' die emeknekama nhiari . He ' a nmai pia nlol A ' die hota nlernana yamori-yalewna . Hota e ' de emolmolan nekama pipi-duma mak edon kamta'ata mere nhu'ru rlol nhiar die pa nla ' a-nmai die nlernan ya'ana-yemnu , tertera-laliahu .
The thief only comes to steal , kill , and destroy . I came that they may have life , and may have it abundantly . ||| Makamnelu-kamna ' a , de nma nkamna ' to ' a ne nma nwunu-nwenna , onde nma nweyata-nwaniawu . Mere Amuai die , totpena rimormiori rlernana mormiori-dardiari maka penpuen niohora Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu .
I am the good shepherd . The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep . ||| A ' di de makodi duma kalwiedweda inhatti . Makodi duma kalwiedwed de nhur dioinia inonni pa ntuwu-nhaiya pipni-dumni .
He who is a hired hand , and not a shepherd , who does n't own the sheep , sees the wolf coming , leaves the sheep , and flees . The wolf snatches the sheep and scatters them . ||| Mere riy mak kodi duma yoma na'an kai lia pipi-duma re matromni de , la'pa namkek tutga hapora-hadawra mak klihir matmata-khaw riarara nmai wia de hota makodi duma die nawlar wia , yoma pipi-duma re e gahani atia ' ira . Ne hota pipni-dumni re kurna-kiatra pa hapora-hadawra nma nlihira-nnaiya .
The hired hand flees because he is a hired hand and does n't care for the sheep . ||| Mak ka'ana siewa-kai re nawlar wia yoma na'an to ' siewa-kai , ne e ' edonna nwo'la nohora pipi-duma re .
I am the good shepherd . I know my own , and I 'm known by my own , ||| Mere A ' di de makodi duma kalwiedwed A ' g inhatti . Agat niohora A pi'pu-du'mu , ne A pi'pu-du'mu ho'mana rat niohora A ' u ,
even as the Father knows me , and I know the Father . I lay down my life for the sheep . ||| pa hota emekwalima A A'mu Natg olek A ' wua , ne Agat niohora A A'mu . Ne hota Agala A ino'nu ga tiuwu-ghai niana A pi'pu-du'mu re .
I have other sheep which are not of this fold . I must bring them also , and they will hear my voice . They will become one flock with one shepherd . ||| A pi'pu-du'mu er walia mak edon ror ma'ta dum wok di pa rawok wutu . Hota Agodia re pa ror wutga A du'mu ri . Ne hota ratlin la A li'ru pa ir rora wokni di rla ' a liewr id pa rler la rioka ida , me A ' g ed mak kla ' makhuri-makwa'ana mak ktorna re .
Therefore the Father loves me , because I lay down my life , that I may take it again . ||| A A'mu Nsayni A ' u , yoma Agala ino'nu pa rwunu-rwenna , totpena hota Amuori owa'ana .
No one takes it away from me , but I lay it down by myself . I have power to lay it down , and I have power to take it again . I received this commandment from my Father . ||| Riy id mana hota edonna nwunu-nwen A ' u . Mere Awuayow nohora Agal A ino'nu di , de plolli nek la A orgah ' u wa . A ' g ed mak kodi plolli pa Agala A ino'nu pa rwunu-rwenna , ne Agodi plolli pa hota Amuori owa'ana , yoma kniar die ed mak A A'mu Nala mai A ' u .
Therefore a division arose again among the Jews because of these words . ||| La'pa Yesus Nakota lir de dewade riy Yahudi re rawo'or owa'ana .
Many of them said , He has a demon and is insane ! Why do you listen to him ? ||| Rirahu riwra , Hade e nga ' u yoma hegana nhu'ru ralma , pa yan tatlin la !
Others said , These are not the sayings of one possessed by a demon . It is n't possible for a demon to open the eyes of the blind , is it ? ||| Mere la ' riy dom de e riwra , Riy mak hegana nhu'ru ralma de edonna raltier die emkade . Taken niana hegana nhi ' kalwieda riy mak matni yata .
It was the Feast of the Dedication at Jerusalem . ||| Noma la'pa nte'ela lerlalawna maka riy Yahudi rtepartarlia yamuki-yahepur nohora ir tuini-wedni maka rhoratreria Uplerlawna roma kreini yamounu-yawitanni la ' a Yerusalem . La ' ler de wal pia tah ' i muti lerni .
It was winter , and Jesus was walking in the temple , in Solomon 's porch . ||| Noma Yesus Nla'-nmai lia Uplerlawna roma kreini nhieunu teras rumah maka rweta la Salomo Genni .
The Jews therefore came around him and said to him , How long will you hold us in suspense ? If you are the Christ , tell us plainly . ||| La ' ler de riy Yahudi rma rawok la Yesus onni pa rpepan reria na'nama ratiana riwra , Mowen nianpena Mukot nohora he ' O ' a totpena yana amparor nohor reri O ' a ? Mukot doin memna la'pa plol toto ' a de Ray Makamori-Kalewna id O ' a !
Jesus answered them , I told you , and you do n't believe . The works that I do in my Father 's name , these testify about me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , A ' g e ukot olek miy wia mere miy die edonna mpiesiaya . Hihi ' a-yapyap miak kalwiedweda , maka Aghi ' reri totpa Aliernohor reria A A'mu nhiopanni de , hare er mak ktutga he ' A ' u .
But you do n't believe , because you are not of my sheep , as I told you . ||| Mere miy edonna mpiesiaya yoma miy edonna mlier wut lia A pipi-du'mu .
My sheep hear my voice , and I know them , and they follow me . ||| A du'mu re ratlin la A li'ru . Agatga re , ne irlernohor A ' u .
I give eternal life to them . They will never perish , and no one will snatch them out of my hand . ||| Agala mormiori-dardiari la ira , ne hota ir edon rler la matmiati plalahwa mere rmormior pia nodi liarni . Riy id mana edonna nlernan talan pa na'ala harella ' A li'mu ralamni .
My Father who has given them to me is greater than all . No one is able to snatch them out of my Father 's hand . ||| A A'mu mak kal olek harella ' mai A ' u , de Nareh dioinia haneknek wawannu . Pede riy id mana edonna narur pia nwarui niana harella ' A A'mu limni ralamni .
I and the Father are one . ||| Agora A A'mu de lir ida .
Therefore the Jews took up stones again to stone him . ||| Noma riy Yahudi re ra'ala owa'an watu yoma riwra ra rwa'ala Yesus .
Jesus answered them , I have shown you many good works from my Father . For which of those works do you stone me ? ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la re , Miy e mimkek oleka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak karehi-kalawna harahu , maka A A'mu Nhopna Aghi ' a . Pa la ' a hihi ' a-yapyap mak kamehi-kayona meni ed maka kariei pia miy miwa mpia'ala A ' u ?
The Jews answered him , We do n't stone you for a good work , but for blasphemy , because you , being a man , make yourself God . ||| Noma Yahudi re rwalolla riwra , Hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona maka Omhi ' nande edonna ratota-rariei pia ampa'ala O ' a , mere yoma Omhi ' lir yat la Uplerlawna . Rimormiori id nek O ' a ne , Omhi ' inonmu de emekneka Uplerlawna .
Jesus answered them , Is n't it written in your law , ‘ I said , you are gods ' ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Miy e mitlin oleka maka miy Puk deulu-tatarmi de e rhorat targa , de Uplerlawna lirni Niwra , Miy die rpol miy lia Uplerlawna a'nani .
If he called them gods , to whom the word of God came and the Scripture ca n't be broken , ||| Itatga la Puka lirni maka ha rhorat taru re rnairia pa nodi liarni . La ' hade pede la'pa riy maka klernana Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu deullu-tatarni nek de , er maka Uplerlawna Nwet la niwra , Uplerlawna a'nani ,
do you say of him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world , ‘ You blaspheme , ' because I said , ‘ I am the Son of God ' ? ||| nihya'pa miy e miwra A ' g e wuohora-tiatra Uplerlawna la'pa A ' g e ukota Uplerlawna A'nani A ' u ? Uplerlawna nekane ed maka Nwaliri-nwalioh nan A ' u me Nhopan pa muai .
If I do n't do the works of my Father , do n't believe me . ||| La'pa A ' g edonna ghi ' nana tulla-kniar miaka A'mu Nala pa Aghi ' nande yana mpiesiay A ' u .
But if I do them , though you do n't believe me , believe the works , that you may know and believe that the Father is in me , and I in the Father . ||| Agat niohora mihmena mpiesiaya A li'ru maka nhi'inde A'ukot tiy miy , mere yoma mimkek nan oleka hihi ' u-yapya'pu mak kalwiedweda re mak Aghi ' nan oleka , hota mpiesiay A ' u . Hota la ' hare pede miat tioto ' meman de Agora A A'mu de riy id ami .
They sought again to seize him , and he went out of their hand . ||| Dewade rawenan pa honona re rwahak pa rtorna Yesus , mere ta'en niana rtorna yoma E Nala ' doin olek ir wa .
He went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was baptizing at first , and he stayed there . ||| Noma Yesus Nawali owa'an la gerlawna Yordan walli , la ' gen miaka Yohansi nharan ulia de , pa Nden la hande wa .
Many came to him . They said , John indeed did no sign , but everything that John said about this man is true . ||| Rirahu rma rre ' teman Yesus la hande , na'nama rakota riwra , Yohansi nmeh ' a neka edonna nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , mere hya ' maka Yohansi nakota nohora la ' riy di , de naplola .
Many believed in him there . ||| Noma rirahu la hande rpesiaya Yesus .
Now a certain man was sick , Lazarus from Bethany , of the village of Mary and her sister , Martha . It was that Mary who had anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair , whose brother Lazarus was sick . ||| La ' ler de , de muanke ' ida nanni Lasarus nor rewre'wa narni Maria nora Marta rhol wiutu la ' leta Betania . Mari di de ed mak khuria wu'ru hup mikmikri la ' Itmatromni lakni , ne nala moratnu na nkuhi akerna . Noma la ler ida de Lasarus e namehra .
The sisters therefore sent to him , saying , Lord , behold , he for whom you have great affection is sick . ||| Pede narni rora rhopan pa rla rod kiot la ' a Yesus onnila Lasarus mehrani-maunu . Pa la'pa rla rakot la Yesus , Matroma , Maria nora Marta narni mak Omsiayn de e namehra .
But when Jesus heard it , he said , This sickness is not to death , but for the glory of God , that God 's Son may be glorified by it . ||| Pa la'pa Yesus Natlin nana lir de noma Nakot la Niwra , Hota nnien die edonna nodia matmiati la ' Lasarus . La ' hare honona de itamkeka totpena ya'uli-yawedi nden rer lia Uplerlawna , me totpena nden rer wial lia Uplerlawna A'nani A ' u .
Now Jesus loved Martha , and her sister , and Lazarus . ||| Yesus Nsayn reria Marta , Maria nora narni Lasarus .
When therefore he heard that he was sick , he stayed two days in the place where he was . ||| Mere la'pa Yesus Natlin nana Lasarus e namehra de , noma Entot pa Nden nek la hande pa mahnekni lera worg owa'ana .
Then after this he said to the disciples , Let 's go into Judea again . ||| Lera woru nte ' doin la dewade Nakot la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re Niwra , Mai pia tawal lia Yudea .
The disciples asked him , Rabbi , the Jews were just trying to stone you . Are you going there again ? ||| Noma rakot la riwra , Tungkurga , na'nama riy Yahudi riwra rwatliewria O ' a la ' hande totpa rwunu-rwenn O ' a , noma dodo'ondi Omuiwra muwali owa'ana ? !
Jesus answered , Are n't there twelve hours of daylight ? If a man walks in the day , he does n't stumble , because he sees the light of this world . ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia yawalliohora totpa ratga de la'pa hota ror E ' talla de hota edon rler la kropna-krieutu yoma lerni edon ntutu ma'ta Nakot la Niwra , Miplinga de la ' lera ida , de lera nhita-nrepra jama termida wehrani woru ? ! Riy maka kor rewre'wa A ' tialla de emeknekama nalala ' lola lelerni , pede edonna ndunti-nwetru , yoma e namkek reria noha wawannu .
But if a man walks in the night , he stumbles , because the light is n't in him . ||| Mere mak kala ' a la lera mel'utni de hota ndunit taru , yoma noha melmela-kalkalma .
He said these things , and after that , he said to them , Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep , but I am going so that I may awake him out of sleep . ||| Yesus lirni emkadella ira na'nama Nakot owa'an la re Niwra , It talanni Lasarus e nanin oleka wa , mere pena A lia umata .
The disciples therefore said , Lord , if he has fallen asleep , he will recover . ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rakot la riwra , Matroma , la'pa Lasarus nanina de hota plet pa nkalwieda .
Now Jesus had spoken of his death , but they thought that he spoke of taking rest in sleep . ||| La'pa Yesus Niwra e nanina de Yesus ralma-riorni de Lasarus nmati olekwa . Mere iratniekame Yesus ralma-riorni , de Lasarus e nanin toto ' a .
So Jesus said to them plainly then , Lazarus is dead . ||| La hade pede Yesus Nto'pi-ngaur lirni Niwra , Plollolli de Lasarus nmati olekwa ,
I am glad for your sakes that I was not there , so that you may believe . Nevertheless , let 's go to him . ||| mere hota hadi nwal lia talan pa mimpiesiaya . La ' hade pede A ralmu e nahepru kennama A ' g edonna lia ' a hande wonyira-melulu pa Aghi ' kalwied e ' a . Mere dodo'ondi de mai pia tla teka Lasarus mak kmat die !
Thomas therefore , who is called Didymus , said to his fellow disciples , Let 's also go , that we may die with him . ||| Noma Tomsa , maka rhoiya la A'na Dio ' de nakot la mutwualli maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re niwra , Mai pia tlernohora Yesus la Yudea , la'pa tmat niohora E ' a .
So when Jesus came , he found that he had been in the tomb four days already . ||| La'pa Yesus Nte'ela Betania noma rakot la Yesus de riwra , rkenia olek Lasarus inonni la liena ralamni pa lerni wogat olek la hande wa .
Now Bethany was near Jerusalem , about fifteen stadia away . ||| Mere leta Betania di , de olietni la Yerusalem , de edon nhal de kilu wotelu .
Many of the Jews had joined the women around Martha and Mary , to console them concerning their brother . ||| Pede riy Yahudi liawanni rma rod niohora Marta nora Maria totpena ramatar nohora yoma narni nkurn olekwa .
Then when Martha heard that Jesus was coming , she went and met him , but Mary stayed in the house . ||| La'pa Marta natlin nana Yesus Nmai nieka , dewade nla nwatroma Yesus , mere Maria edon nlergot ma'ta .
Therefore Martha said to Jesus , Lord , if you would have been here , my brother would n't have died . ||| Noma Marta nakot la Yesus niwra , Matroma , la'pa ler de Matro'mu etla handi mana taken niana a na'ru de nmati .
Even now I know that whatever you ask of God , God will give you . ||| Mere Agat niohora meman de la ' dodo'ondi wali pia Uplerlawna hota Nal to ' a hya ' a mak Matroma Nwaka la E ' a .
Jesus said to her , Your brother will rise again . ||| Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Marta , o narmu de hota nmori owa'ana .
Martha said to him , I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day . ||| Marta nwalolla , Matroma , Agatga de hota Lasarus nmori owa'an la ' a lera noha niatni maka ramoria mak kmati rella matmiatni ralamni .
Jesus said to her , I am the resurrection and the life . He who believes in me will still live , even if he dies . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Marta Niwra , A ' g ed mak kamoria mak kmati me gal mormiori lia ira pa nodi liarni . Riy mak kpesiay A ' die hota matmiati edon nodi plolli la mere rmori owa'an la ' a matmiatni ralamni .
Whoever lives and believes in me will never die . Do you believe this ? ||| Ne mak kmormiori mia'ta , makpesiay A ' u , de hota rler la mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Hota ompuesiay lir maka A'ukota re me edonna ?
She said to him , Yes , Lord . I have come to believe that you are the Christ , God 's Son , he who comes into the world . ||| Marta niwra , Matroma apuesiaya , Matro'mu de Uplerlawna A'nani mak khi ' a Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Nmai lia nohkeran di wawannu .
When she had said this , she went away and called Mary , her sister , secretly , saying , The Teacher is here and is calling you . ||| La'pa Marta nakot emkade noma nla npolga elli Maria pa napup lia tlinni niwra , Tungkuru Nmai olekwa ne e Natian o ' a .
When she heard this , she arose quickly and went to him . ||| La'pa Maria natlin nan hade noma namat doin pa nla nwatrom Yesus .
Now Jesus had not yet come into the village , but was in the place where Martha met him . ||| La hade de Yesus edonna nler ma'ta la leta ralamni . Enden ma't la leta to'orni maka Enor Marta rwatrom pa rwahauru .
Then the Jews who were with her in the house and were consoling her , when they saw Mary , that she rose up quickly and went out , followed her , saying , She is going to the tomb to weep there . ||| Riy Yahudi maka ramatar nohora Maria la ' roma nayanni , la'pa ramkek nana Maria pleta-plet pa namat doin wa pa nlergot wa , noma rla rlernohora Maria yoma ratniek yanpa Maria nla nkakur la Lasarus hoini wawannu .
Therefore when Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him , she fell down at his feet , saying to him , Lord , if you would have been here , my brother would n't have died . ||| La'pa Maria nte ' tar lia Yesus onni noma nwaltior la Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama nakot la niwra , Matroma , la'pa Omdien la handi mana la ler de , a na'ru de edonna nmati .
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping , and the Jews weeping who came with her , he groaned in the spirit and was troubled , ||| La'pa Yesus Namkek nana Maria nkakru , me la ' walia riy Yahudi mak kor rewre'wa Mari ' talla re honona rko ' a-rkakur wali , dewade Yesus mana ralamni nmayo ' doin wali .
and said , Where have you laid him ? They told him , Lord , come and see . ||| Noma Yesus Natiana re Niwra , Miy e midera Lasarus inonni la hanmeni ? Noma rwalolla riwra , Ma Mumkeka Matroma .
Jesus wept . ||| Noma Yesus Nkakur wa .
The Jews therefore said , See how much affection he had for him ! ||| Noma Yahudi re riwra , Mimkek to'ola hade e Nsayn wenna Lasarus .
Some of them said , Could n't this man , who opened the eyes of him who was blind , have also kept this man from dying ? ||| Mere la ' dom de e riwra , Hade nhi ' a mak matni kyata pa rkalwieda ne nihya'pa E edonna Nhi ' Lasarus pa edon nmati ?
Jesus therefore , again groaning in himself , came to the tomb . Now it was a cave , and a stone lay against it . ||| Noma rla'awa lien maka rkenia Lasarus inonni de . La'pa rte'ela hande Yesus ralamni nmolu-nhelma . La ' hande e rala wat liawna id la ra rherit targa lienni de nhiarni .
Jesus said , Take away the stone . Martha , the sister of him who was dead , said to him , Lord , by this time there is a stench , for he has been dead four days . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mpiaklol doinia wat diel la ' a nhiar de gaini . Noma Lasarus mak kmat die narni Marta nakot la niwra , Matroma , rader olek hadella ' melul handena , la lera wogat olekwa pa hota inonni ngehpa-nta ' l olekwa !
Jesus said to her , Did n't I tell you that if you believed , you would see God 's glory ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Marta Niwra , A ' g e ukot oleka hare tiy o'owa Marta . La'pa ompuesiaya de hota o ' e mumkeka Uplerlawna preheni-mkaini .
So they took away the stone from the place where the dead man was lying . Jesus lifted up his eyes and said , Father , I thank you that you listened to me . ||| Noma rte'la la wat liawan de pa rwaklol dioinia . Nhor nia'nama Yesus Nwatniar la lyanti na'nama Niwra , Ama , A ' u'uli-uwedi O ' a yoma Omutlin olek la mai A wua .
I know that you always listen to me , but because of the multitude standing around I said this , that they may believe that you sent me . ||| Agatga de O tlinmu e Natnia'wa rer lia A li'ru , mere A'ukot nohora harilla ' rimormiori mak kden la handi , totpena rpesiaya O ' nanpena ed maka khopn A ' u .
When he had said this , he cried with a loud voice , Lazarus , come out ! ||| La'pa Nakot emkade , na'nama Nhaun matmiat pia Niwra , Lasarus ee ! Mliergot pa mmuai ee !
He who was dead came out , bound hand and foot with wrappings , and his face was wrapped around with a cloth . Jesus said to them , Free him , and let him go . ||| Noma Lasarus mak kmati olek de nlergot wa . Limni-lakni e ratnioman ma'ta la koka , ne gaini e natniutuw la kokanan maka ra rtutuw gaini . Yesus Niwra , Miewar doinia kok lawan della totpa nala ' de yana nawuhi-nawe'eta .
Therefore many of the Jews who came to Mary and saw what Jesus did believed in him . ||| Riy Yahudi harahu maka kma kamatar nohora Maria , de rpesiaya Yesus , yoma ramkek oleka hya ' mak Yesus Nhi ' nan oleka re .
But some of them went away to the Pharisees and told them the things which Jesus had done . ||| Mere riy dom pal lia ira , de rla rod lir la riy Parisi la ' a hya ' maka Yesus Nhi ' a-nyap niana re .
The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a council , and said , What are we doing ? For this man does many signs . ||| Hade pede riy Parisi rora imam re o'tani-matni , rpolg awoka mak ktorna watghudi la agama Yahudi honona pa rawok wutu . Honona rwaror pa riwra , Hota itsi ' a hya ' a la Hadena ? Riy di Nhi ' neka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga E rurni-laini .
If we leave him alone like this , everyone will believe in him , and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation . ||| La'pa it edonna tatut niana hade , de hota rirahu rpesiaya , pa reiniande kokokna-rariarni lalawna , ne la'awa honi de hota mak kodi plolli la hairi Roma rmai pia hota rwakloli-rwaklalia Yahudi itora it roma kreini di .
But a certain one of them , Caiaphas , being high priest that year , said to them , You know nothing at all , ||| Riy id etla hande , nanni Kayafas , la ' anin de , nhi ' a o'ta-mata lalawna la imam-imam re , pede niwra , Hoi ! Miy e miplinga hadomdoma .
nor do you consider that it is advantageous for us that one man should die for the people , and that the whole nation not perish . ||| Miy e miplinga de la ' samomuounu de rirahu nariei pia riy ida nmati , mere yana riy ida nariei pa it luwnu-a'nani namkoha-namnanna .
Now he did n't say this of himself , but being high priest that year , he prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation , ||| Kayafas enakot hade , mere ha wniaror wamueheni atia ' hade mere yoma Uplerlawna Nariei . Enakot nohora hare yoma la ' a anin de ralamni de , E de , o'ta lawna la imam-imam re , pa lirni de nror targa nakot targa Yesus matmiatni de yoma la ' a Yahudi rerieini .
and not for the nation only , but that he might also gather together into one the children of God who are scattered abroad . ||| Ne edonna ntut nian to ' a riy Yahudi rmeh ' a mere la ' walia Uplerlawna upni-a'nani mak kden la meni-meni totpa hota rawok wutga la ida .
So from that day forward they took counsel that they might put him to death . ||| La'pa ler de meman pa mak kodi plolli la Yahudi re rla lir id pa riwra rwenna Yesus .
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews , but departed from there into the country near the wilderness , to a city called Ephraim . He stayed there with his disciples . ||| La ' hade pede Yesus Nahmena Nayamkek la riy mutlialawna riy Yahudi nhiopannu-pniepanni . Yesus Nwaran la hande pa Nla'awa la ' let maka ha rweta la Efraim mak rehgorgorga wo'orletna-kawurloini . Yesus Nor wutga maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rden la hande wa .
Now the Passover of the Jews was at hand . Many went up from the country to Jerusalem before the Passover , to purify themselves . ||| La ' ler de de nhi ' pa nwakriania lera-mela Yahudi lerlalawanni Paska . Pa rirahu rwatiawua leta-ruhuna re pa rtawniokria Yerusalem totpena rlernohora riy mutlialawna wokni-le'enu pa ramou-rawitna inonni totpa rwei lerlalawan mak hota ha rhi ' a de .
Then they sought for Jesus and spoke with one another as they stood in the temple , What do you think-that he is n't coming to the feast at all ? ||| Noma la'pa rawok la Uplerlawna roma kreini de rahakhak reria Yesus pa idma nakot la ida riwra , Emkamenila miy ralma-riormi ? Matialo'onama E ' edonna Nmai lia ' a lerlalawna ri ?
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had commanded that if anyone knew where he was , he should report it , that they might seize him . ||| Irakot emkade yoma la imam-imam re o'tani-matni rora riy Parisi ralgot oleka tita la ' a riy meni mak kat niohora Yesus handen la , de plet pa nma nakot totpena rla rtorna .
Then , six days before the Passover , Jesus came to Bethany , where Lazarus was , who had been dead , whom he raised from the dead . ||| Tre ' ma'ta lera wonem pa lerlalawna Paska , noma Yesus Nla ' a leta Betania , la Lasarus letni maka Yesus Namori Lasarus la ' matmiatni ralamni de .
So they made him a supper there . Martha served , but Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with him . ||| La hande de riy rhi ' ya'anlawna-yemunlawna pa rhoi-rtania Yesus , ne Marta ed mak kamkek la hare pa ra'ana . Lasarus nor wutga mak kmai re pa ra'an rewre'wa wut lia Yesus .
Therefore Mary took a pound of ointment of pure nard , very precious , and anointed Jesus ' feet and wiped his feet with her hair . The house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne Maria nodia wu'ru hup mikmikri narwastu , mak welli werta , edonna nhal de potla nwatniarnara stenga liter , na'nama nhuria wu'ru della ' Yesus lakni , nhor nioma nala moratnu na naha kerna . Noma wu'ru de huwnu mikmikarni nawah ' a nana rom de tetema .
Then Judas Iscariot , Simon 's son , one of his disciples , who would betray him , said , ||| Mere Yudas Iskariot , riy id la riy maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , maka hota e ' nekpa nwaldioin pa na'olga Yesus , de edon nwayow nan pat de hihi'ini de pa niwra ,
Why was n't this ointment sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor ? ||| Hoi ! Nihya'pa edonna na'ol nieka wu'ru de pa welli de hota rala la riy mak kakleha-kaplara ? ! Hota welli de nla ' nan meman la kupna-kai gaji la anni id gahani .
Now he said this , not because he cared for the poor , but because he was a thief , and having the money box , used to steal what was put into it . ||| Yudas lirni de edonna ntar lia riy mak kakleha-kaplara , mere yoma riy kamna ' mera id e ' a . E ' ed maka ktorreri Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re kupanni , ne nhi'inde ena'ala kupna la ' a kaha pa enken wiutga la e kupan wamueheni .
But Jesus said , Leave her alone . She has kept this for the day of my burial . ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Miolin doin e ' pa nhi ' samomuou A lia dodo'ondi to ' a . E ' edon na'olu hup mikmikar de yoma niwra nwahi ' tar A pua rtamni A ' u .
For you always have the poor with you , but you do n't always have me . ||| Hota A ' g edon gor miy pia nodi liarni . Mere riy mak kakleha-kaplara re nhi'inde e ror wutga miy totpa mtiulan la ' ira .
A large crowd therefore of the Jews learned that he was there , and they came , not for Jesus ' sake only , but that they might see Lazarus also , whom he had raised from the dead . ||| Riy rahu ratlin de Yesus etla ' Betania , noma irla ' wal lia hande . Rla ' de , edonna riwra rwatrom to ' a Yesus mere e riwra ramkek walia Lasarus maka Yesus Namoria la matmiatni ralamni de .
But the chief priests conspired to put Lazarus to death also , ||| Hade wal pia ed mak kariei pede imam o'tani-matni re rna'ohma pa rwenan walia Lasarus .
because on account of him many of the Jews went away and believed in Jesus . ||| Yoma la ' e ' pede Yahudi harahu rawlar dioinia ir la , ne rla rpesiaya Yesus .
On the next day a great multitude had come to the feast . When they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem , ||| La'pa repar wa , dewade rirahu mak kmai Yerusalem totpena ramuki-rahepur nohor lerlalawna Paska de , ratlin de Yesus hota Nmai wialia Yerusalem , ne ed ma'ta la talan letgara .
they took the branches of the palm trees and went out to meet him , and cried out , Hosanna ! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord , the King of Israel ! ||| Noma rla ra'ala korma tawni na'nama rla pa rwatroma Yesus , ne he ' i-hepur nohora la loi liawna-talan lawna ralamni . Rhaunu-rhaun pa riwra , Ya'uli-yawedi nden rer tiy O ' ee ! Ta'uli-tawedi , tsu'ru-tselma O ' mak kmai pia kodia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni ! Ta'uli-tawedia , tlilili-tmamuawua O ' ee , makla ' Israel Rayni !
Jesus , having found a young donkey , sat on it . As it is written , ||| La ' ler de Yesus Nmai die Nha ' nana keledai a'na ida , maka Nwak nana la ' riy ida . Pede plola la Puka lirni mak kiwra ,
Do n't be afraid , daughter of Zion . Behold , your King comes , sitting on a donkey 's colt . ||| Makden Sion ee ! Yan mimta'ata ! Mimkek la Raymi Nmai nieka de e Nha ' nana keledai a'na ida !
His disciples did n't understand these things at first , but when Jesus was glorified , then they remembered that these things were written about him , and that they had done these things to him . ||| La ' ler de maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re id mana edon rat niohora hare honona nnia'eratni . Mere la'pa Uplerlawna Nhi ' pa riy ra'uli-rawedi Yesus onnila E matmiatni nhor nioma Nmori owa'ana , na'nama ratga la ' a hya ' ed maka ha rhi ' nana la E ' a , de honona erla Puka ralamni .
The multitude therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead was testifying about it . ||| Riy mak kden wal lia ' ler maka Yesus Npolga Lasarus la liena ralamni totpa Namori owa'an e ' la matmiatni , er mak kodi liarni pa rla rakot nohora hya ' maka Yesus Nhi ' nana re honona .
For this cause also the multitude went and met him , because they heard that he had done this sign . ||| La ' hade pede rirahu rma rlernohora Yesus yoma ratlin nana de hade ed mak khi ' nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak kareh mieman de , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini .
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves , See how you accomplish nothing . Behold , the world has gone after him . ||| Noma riy Parisi re idma nakot la ida riwra , Ah ! Hota it edonna tsi ' hadompa ! Tamkek nek la rimormiori honona rla pa rlernohor E ' wee !
Now there were certain Greeks among those who went up to worship at the feast . ||| Mak kla ' a Yerusalem totpena rla ' rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Uplerlawna la ' lerlalawna dom de e rwatiaga Yunani .
Therefore , these came to Philip , who was from Bethsaida of Galilee , and asked him , saying , Sir , we want to see Jesus . ||| Noma rodi liarni la Pilipsu pa rwahak hadom la e ' a . Pilipus di makdena leta Betsaida la ' Galilea yapatni id e ' a . Ratiana Pilipsu riwra , Hyalia , ami e miwra mpatroma Yesus .
Philip came and told Andrew , and in turn , Andrew came with Philip , and they told Jesus . ||| Dewade Pilipsu la nakot harella Andarias noma rrora rla rakota la Yesus riwra , Matroma , makden Yunani rwahak pa rwatrom O ' a .
Jesus answered them , The time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified . ||| Dewade Yesus Nakot la rrora Niwra , Nte ' olek la lerni pa Uplerlawna Nran Rimormiori A'nani A ' u lia heyanna totpena rimormiori ramkek memn A ' u me ra'uli-rawedi A ' u .
Most certainly I tell you , unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies , it remains by itself alone . But if it dies , it bears much fruit . ||| Plola la A li'ru ri honona . Hota A ino'nu di emeknekama wetra ' lawna olli . La'pa wetra ' lawna ola ida edonna rtamin nana la tani ralamni , de hota olli de edon na'itra-nalawna . Mere la'pa rtamnia olli de nanpena hota na'ona-natawi , nahara-nadewtu , me nawo ' nana wetra ' lawna .
He who loves his life will lose it . He who hates his life in this world will keep it to eternal life . ||| Emkade wal lia rimormior miy , de riy maka ralamni tetema nden rer lia mormiorni , de hota mormiorni de nmol wua . Mere la'pa riy maka ralamni edonna nden rer lia mormiorni la ' noh di wawannu , de hota nlernan mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni .
If anyone serves me , let him follow me . Where I am , there my servant will also be . If anyone serves me , the Father will honor him . ||| Riy meni ed mak kar lia A knia'ru de nlernohor reri A ' u totpena nor A ' pua amden wut lia geni ida . Ne A A'mu Nhi ' wali e ' pa nlernana ya'uli .
Now my soul is troubled . What shall I say ? ‘ Father , save me from this time ' ? But I came to this time for this cause . ||| A ih'ru-ralmu wolwo'la yoma la ' a tututu-wawuau mak kmai niek di , pa hota Agiwa Awuaka hya ' a la ' A A'mu la ' dodo'on dino ? A li'ru nek hadilla ' A A'mu , Amee ! Mulewna A lia ' dodo'ondi wo ? Mere hota emkameni pa A'ukot emkade yoma matmiat die ed mak katota-kariei , pede Amuai .
Father , glorify your name ! Then a voice came out of the sky , saying , I have both glorified it and will glorify it again . ||| Noma Yesus Nwak la Uplerlawna Niwra , Amee , Mtiut niek O plolmu-mnehemu la rimormiori honona totpena nanmu nden rer niek la tutullu-lolo'oni . Yesus Nakot emkade dewade plin-plinnianama lira ida nwatiawu lyanti pa Niwra , Akeni oleka A na'nu la tutullu-lolo'oni , ne hota A ' g ed mak ktutulg owa'ana la ' gen tiutullu .
Therefore the multitude who stood by and heard it said that it had thundered . Others said , An angel has spoken to him . ||| Riy honona mak kden la hande ratlin nana lir de . Dom de riwra kukru-gauru de . Mere dom de riwra Uplerlawna hopopanni e nwahaur la E ' a .
Jesus answered , This voice has n't come for my sake , but for your sakes . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Lir de nayatlina , de hade edonna ntarga hadella mai A ' u , mere lir de e rtarga hade tiy miy .
Now is the judgment of this world . Now the prince of this world will be cast out . ||| La ' dodo'ondi de nte'ela lerni-melli pa rhudia nohkeran di la ' watghudi liokarni . La ' dodo'ondi de hegana amlawanni mak kodi plolli la noha wawannu di de rrinin gota la tio'ora .
And I , if I am lifted up from the earth , will draw all people to myself . ||| Mere A ' di , la'pa rrana tutullu A ' u , de hota A'uwoka momuoga riy honona mai A ' u .
But he said this , signifying by what kind of death he should die . ||| Yesus Enakot emkade totpena e rat niohora E matmiatni ha nlolola la auwlakra hananni .
The multitude answered him , We have heard out of the law that the Christ remains forever . How do you say , ‘ The Son of Man must be lifted up ' ? Who is this Son of Man ? ||| Riy mak kden la hande rakot la riwra , La ' a Puka ralamni , de e niwra , Ray Makamori-Kalewna Nmormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Ne emkamenila O lirmu niwra hota la ' a Rimormiori A'na O ' de , rhi ' O ' pa rran tutu'lu ? Hota he ' eda Rimormiori A'na deno ?
Jesus therefore said to them , Yet a little while the light is with you . Walk while you have the light , that darkness does n't overtake you . He who walks in the darkness does n't know where he is going . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot nohor inon wamueheni pa Niwra , Edon nalo'on wali ne Riy mak ha rhoiya Lelerni , mak kden la miy letgarmi de , Nmol wua . Pede dodo'ondi mila ' nohora Leler de , yanpa hota mela ndamit nan miy . Riy maka klol melli , de hota naplin niohora , e etla hanmeni .
While you have the light , believe in the light , that you may become children of light . Jesus said these things , and he departed and hid himself from them . ||| A'ukot tiy miy totpa mpiesiaya Leler de , yoma Leler de ed ma'ta tiy miy , de totpena hota rhoi miy lia upa-a'na lelera ! La'pa Yesus Nakot emkare dewade Enwatitin la hande wa , ne edonna Ntut gaini la ir wa .
But though he had done so many signs before them , yet they did n't believe in him , ||| La ' emkameni ho'ola Yesus Ntutga hihi'ini-yapyapni mak kamehi-kayona harahu mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , la ' a Yahudi re gaini ralamni , ho'mana edonna rpesiaya .
that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled , which he spoke , Lord , who has believed our report ? To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed ? ||| Mak kariei pede ir edon rpesiaya , de totpa naplol nohora Yesaya makwohorulu-ktatrulu die lirni . Yoma la ' ululu de e niwra , Matroma , hota he ' ed maka kpesiaya a lir mamni rina de ? Emeknekama riy id mana edonna rwayow nohora de O plolmu-mnehemu ed mak karia honona ri !
For this cause they could n't believe , for Isaiah said again , ||| Ne Yesaya nhorat tar walia hya ' mak kariei pia ir honona edonna rpesiaya , niwra ,
He has blinded their eyes and he hardened their heart , lest they should see with their eyes , and perceive with their heart , and would turn , and I would heal them . ||| Uplerlawna ed mak khi ' nana ir matni , me ir ihranu-ralamni pa ratehra , totpena yan ramkeka , me ralma-riorni mana yana rwarora , me yan rawali owa'an la E ' a totpena yanpa E ' ed mak khi ' ir pa rler la kalwiedni .
Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory , and spoke of him . ||| Yesaya nakot emkare yoma enamkek oleka Yesus preheni-mkaini pa nakot nohora la E ' a .
Nevertheless , even many of the rulers believed in him , but because of the Pharisees they did n't confess it , so that they would n't be put out of the synagogue , ||| Riy harahu edon rpesiaya emeka Yesaya nakot oleka de , mere emkade ho'mana , riy rahu , la'pa Yahudi o'tani-matni harahu mana rpesiaya Yesus de , Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa inhatta . Mere ir edonna rparan pia rakota la nurnu yoma ramta'at la yanpa riy Parisi rlarna pa ir ror wutga la krei-iskola .
for they loved men 's praise more than God 's praise . ||| Ir edon rakota la nurnu yoma Yahudi o'tani-matni re ralamni nko ' i reria totpa ir rimormior wialli ra'uli-rawed rieria ira , mere ir edon rwaror nohora Uplerlawna ya'ulli-yawedni la ' ira .
Jesus cried out and said , Whoever believes in me , believes not in me , but in him who sent me . ||| Noma Yesus Nhaun pa Niwra , Riy mak kpesiay A ' u , de edonna npesiaya A o'ta wa'tu di to ' a , mere npesiay wialia E ' mak khopn A ' u .
He who sees me sees him who sent me . ||| Ne riy mak kamkek A ' u , de enamkek oleka Mak khopna A die .
I have come as a light into the world , that whoever believes in me may not remain in the darkness . ||| Amuai noha wawannu di , de Agodia lelerni , totpena riy honona makpesiay A ' u yana rdella melmelli .
If anyone listens to my sayings and does n't believe , I do n't judge him . For I came not to judge the world , but to save the world . ||| Amuai noha wawannu , de A ' g edonna muai pia tiorna watghudi la riy mak edon klernohora A li'ru maka enatlin nan oleka re , mere Amuai die totpena A'umori-ulewna rimormior noh di mniotni .
He who rejects me , and does n't receive my sayings , has one who judges him . The word that I spoke will judge him in the last day . ||| Mere la ' lera-mela noha niatni hota A li'ru ed maka rnairia pa ra rukum rira maka kwayotlia A ' u yoma rahmena rreinian A li'ru .
For I spoke not from myself , but the Father who sent me gave me a commandment , what I should say and what I should speak . ||| Yoma A ' g edonna godia A ralma-rior wamueh ' u , mere A A'mu mak khopn A ' u , E ' ed mak khopan la ' a hya ' maka A'ukota tiy miy .
I know that his commandment is eternal life . The things therefore which I speak , even as the Father has said to me , so I speak . ||| Ne Agat niohora la'pa hya ' maka Nhopan pa A'ukota , de hade nodia mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Pede A'ukot nohora hya ' maka A A'mu Nwatutga mai A ' u .
Now before the feast of the Passover , Jesus , knowing that his time had come that he would depart from this world to the Father , having loved his own who were in the world , he loved them to the end . ||| La'pa lerlalawna Paska nwakrian wia , de Yesus e Nat niohora de nte ' olek la lerni-melli pa Nwaran la nohkeran diwa totpena Nawal lia E Amni . Yesus ed mak khi ' kalwiedwed la riy mak E mutnu-rahanu la noha wawannu , me dodo'ondi lerni ntutu-nte ' olek di pa Entutga E ralam kalwiedni mak karehi-kalawan de la ' ira yoma hota Nmat lia ir rerieini .
During supper , the devil having already put into the heart of Judas Iscariot , Simon 's son , to betray him , ||| La'pa lera nheria , Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ra'ana-remun rewre'wa . La ' ler de la ' hegana amlawanni nkar lia Yudas , Simon Iskariot a'nani de ralamni pede nwaror oleka totpena hota nwaldioin pa na'olga Yesus .
Jesus , knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands , and that he came from God and was going to God , ||| Yesus Natg oleka de Amni Ntutg oleka E ' pa Enodi plolli la nohkerna-rai miarna . Enat niohor walia de Enwatiawu Uplerlawna pa Enmai lia nohkeran di , ne hota emkade walia Enawali owa'an la Uplerlawna .
arose from supper , and laid aside his outer garments . He took a towel and wrapped a towel around his waist . ||| La hade pede Entutrier pia No'lu dioinia raini plalahwani pa Na'ala koka mnurnuhru ida Nwatiehra la nehlani .
Then he poured water into the basin , and began to wash the disciples ' feet and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around him . ||| Nhor nia'nama Nhuri gera la wra ' u tani id na'nama Nohma maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re lakni me Nala kok maka kawniatehra la nehlani de na Naha ' kerna .
Then he came to Simon Peter . He said to him , Lord , do you wash my feet ? ||| La'pa Nte'ela Simon Petrus , noma Petrus natiana , Matroma , he ' nakot pa Matro'mu ed mak kohma a la'ku di ?
Jesus answered him , You do n't know what I am doing now , but you will understand later . ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , La ' dodo'ondi de o ' edonna mnia'erit nana ma'ta hya ' maka Aghi ' a ri . Pena omuatga .
Peter said to him , You will never wash my feet ! Jesus answered him , If I do n't wash you , you have no part with me . ||| Petrus niwra , Yana Matroma . Ralul pia Matro'mu Nohma a la'ku ! Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , La'pa A ' g edonna gohma lakmu , de emekwalima omukleha nhiakra mai A ' u .
Simon Peter said to him , Lord , not my feet only , but also my hands and my head ! ||| Noma Simon Petrus nakot la niwra , Hademkade yan Matro'mu Nohma a la'ku to ' a mere a li'mu nora a o'tu wali !
Jesus said to him , Someone who has bathed only needs to have his feet washed , but is completely clean . You are clean , but not all of you . ||| Yesus Niwra , Riy mak karoh olek inonni de rmomuog olekwa . Pede yana rohma inonmi , eneknek to'ama rohma lakni . Miy di de miou-mpitna olekwa mere miy hononmi edonna .
For he knew him who would betray him , therefore he said , You are not all clean . ||| Yesus Nakot emkade yoma Yesus Nat niohora he ' ed mak kawaldioinia pa na'olga E ' a . La hade pede Eniwra , Miy miou-mpitna olek wa mere miy hononmi edonna .
So when he had washed their feet , put his outer garment back on , and sat down again , he said to them , Do you know what I have done to you ? ||| Dewade Yesus Nohma ir honona lakni , nhor nia'nama Nhu'rg owa'an la raini plalahwani de na'nama Namtatna owa'ana la genni . Noma Natiana re , Miy e mnia'erit nana maka na'nama Aghi ' a tiy miy rena ?
You call me , ‘ Teacher ' and ‘ Lord . ' You say so correctly , for so I am . ||| Miy e mpiolga A die tungkuru onde matroma ne hade naplola , yoma A ' die de miy tungkurmi me miy matrommi .
If I then , the Lord and the Teacher , have washed your feet , you also ought to wash one another 's feet . ||| Pa la'pa A ' die mak kla ' matroma me tungkuru tiy miy ed mak kohma miy lakmi , de hota emkade wali pia miy miana mtiutga nhiolmi mak klol yawa me mak katu khima-kre ' a la rimormior wialmi pa miy idma nohma id lakni .
For I have given you an example , that you should also do as I have done to you . ||| A ' g ed mak ktutga loi-talan de tiy miy , totpena miy wial miana , mhi ' a hya ' maka Aghi ' olek di tiy miy wia .
Most certainly I tell you , a servant is not greater than his lord , neither is one who is sent greater than he who sent him . ||| A li'ru ri raplola ! Mimliernohora A nhio'lu di maka Aliola yawa me ghima-rie ' rira , yoma miy edon mireh dioin A ' u . Miy die de A hopopnu-lili'iru me mak Aghopna . Ne la ' hopopna-lili'iru ida de edonna narehelia upni-matromni , me la ' walia mak ha rhopna ida de edon nareh niana mak khopan de mere nhu'ru-nhelam pa nlernohora matromni hihi'ini-yapyapni me nhiopanni .
If you know these things , blessed are you if you do them . ||| Pa la ' dodo'ondi de miy miat momuog olek hari honona maka Atiutga tiy miy , pede miy miana mliernohora re , totpa hota miy e mliernan wali unut lawna la ' a Uplerlawna !
I do n't speak concerning all of you . I know whom I have chosen , but that the Scripture may be fulfilled , ‘ He who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me . ' ||| Mere riy id tiy miy hota edon rlernohora re pede hota edon nlernan wali unut lawan de . Awualir olek miy wia ne A ' g e gat niohora la ' miy hononmi yehwami . Emkade ho'mana Awualir nian olek wali e ' wa totpa Puka lirni ntutu-nte'ela . De Puka lirni emkadilla , La ' a he ' ed mak kor A ' u ka'ana roti , de e ' ed mak kmalawna la A ' u .
From now on , I tell you before it happens , that when it happens , you may believe that I am he . ||| A'ukot tiy miy lia ' dodo'ondi memna la ' a hya ' maka hota ha rhi'nande , totpena hota la'pa mimkek nana hare honona maka A'ukot oleka tiy miy wia , de hota mpiesiay miemna de A ' g E ' inhatta maka A'ukot oleka de tiy miy .
Most certainly I tell you , he who receives whomever I send , receives me , and he who receives me , receives him who sent me . ||| Plola la A li'ru ri , hameni mak kreiniana riy mak Aghopna re , de enreinian wali A ' u , me ha meni mak kreinian A ' u , de enreinian walia Uplerlawna mak khopan pa Amuai .
When Jesus had said this , he was troubled in spirit , and testified , Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me . ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot emkade noma ralamni nmolu-nhelma . Noma Nto'pi-ngaur la Niwra , Mpiesiayo ! Hota la ' riy id tiy miy die hota niwra na'olga A ' u !
The disciples looked at one another , perplexed about whom he spoke . ||| Dewade maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re idma namkek la ida . Ne honona rwer rer wiawni yoma iraplin mua'ta he ' ed maka ha nakot nohor deno ?
One of his disciples , whom Jesus loved , was at the table , leaning against Jesus ' chest . ||| Riy id la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , de riy maka Yesus Nsaynia de namtatna la Yesus walli .
Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him , and said to him , Tell us who it is of whom he speaks . ||| Noma Simon Petrus nahe ' miatni la mutwualli maka Yesus Nsaynia de totpena natiana Yesus la ' a he ' eda riy deno ?
He , leaning back , as he was , on Jesus ' chest , asked him , Lord , who is it ? ||| Noma Petrus mutwualli de napup lia Yesus niwra , Matroma , Mtiulan pa Mukota riy della mai a ' u .
Jesus therefore answered , It is he to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it . So when he had dipped the piece of bread , he gave it to Judas , the son of Simon Iscariot . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Riy maka Agala rot miaka Atio ' la A la'ru mniotni de e ' inhatta ! Noma Yesus Na'ala rot anna ida , na'nama Nto ' a la larni ralamni pa Nala la Yudas , Simon Iskariot a'nani de .
After the piece of bread , then Satan entered into him . Then Jesus said to him , What you do , do quickly . ||| La'pa Yudas nte'la nana rot diewade hegana amlawanni nhu'ru ralma . Pa Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Plet pa mhi ' a hya ' maka omuiwra mhi ' a re !
Now nobody at the table knew why he said this to him . ||| La mak ka'ana-kemun la hade id mana edonna nat niohor etia la ' a hya ' mak kariei piede Yesus Nakot harella Yudas .
For some thought , because Judas had the money box , that Jesus said to him , Buy what things we need for the feast , or that he should give something to the poor . ||| Dom e rwarora yanpa Yesus Nhopan pa Yudas nla nawel hadom pa rhi ' a la ' lerlalawan de , onde yanpa ral kupna oke'ela ' riy mak kakleha-kaplara , yoma Yudas nanpena ed mak ktorreri ir kupanni mak kden la kaha .
Therefore having received that morsel , he went out immediately . It was night . ||| La'pa Yudas nte'la nana rot die dewade nlergot wa . Ne lera mana nmel wa .
When he had gone out , Jesus said , Now the Son of Man has been glorified , and God has been glorified in him . ||| La'pa Yudas nla'awa noma Yesus Niwra , Ntutu-nte ' oleka la lerni pa rimormiori ramkek nan Rimormiori A'nani A ' di rrana la ' heyanna totpa rimormiori ra'uli-rawedi A ' u . Me onnila A hihi ' u-yapya'pu mak Agiwra ghi ' a di , pede Uplerlawna nanni de ha ra'uli-rawedia la tutullu-lolo'oni .
If God has been glorified in him , God will also glorify him in himself , and he will glorify him immediately . ||| Ne onnila A hihi ' u-yapya'pu ed mak kariei , pede Uplerlawna nanni de rran atulga la lyanti , pede hota E ' wal pia ed mak kareiniande riy ra'uli-rawedia A ' u , ne edon nalo'on wali ne Uplerlawna Nhi ' hade .
Little children , I will be with you a little while longer . You will seek me , and as I said to the Jews , ‘ Where I am going , you ca n't come , ' so now I tell you . ||| Upa-a'na miy hononmi , hota A ' g edonna gor miy pia mholi plalahwa . Ne emeknekama maka A'ukot targa la Yahudi o'tani-matni , de A'ukot wali tiy miy lia dodo'ondi , de hota miy mpiahak A ' u mere la gen miaka Alia ' a de hota miy edonna mpiakriania .
A new commandment I give to you , that you love one another . Just as I have loved you , you also love one another . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , tit warwuaru di ed mak Agala tiy miy , de totpa miy idma mhi ' kalwiedwed ida pa emeka nhi'inde Aghi ' kalwiedwed miy die .
By this everyone will know that you are my disciples , if you have love for one another . ||| La'pa miy idma nhi ' kalwiedwed ida , de hota riy honona ratga de miy er mak klernohor reri A ' u .
Simon Peter said to him , Lord , where are you going ? Jesus answered , Where I am going , you ca n't follow now , but you will follow afterwards . ||| Noma Simon Petrus niwra , Matroma , hota Matro'mu Niwra Nla ' meni ? Noma Yesus Nakot la Petrus niwra , Petrus , hota Alia ' la ' dodo'ondi de hota o edonna mliernohora A ' u ! Hota nhoru olekwa , nanpena omliernohor owa'an A ' u .
Peter said to him , Lord , why ca n't I follow you now ? I will lay down my life for you . ||| Matroma , nihya'pa A ' g edonna liernohor O la ' dodo'on dina ? ! A ' di de wuayow nohor pa hota amuat lia O wawanmu Matroma .
Jesus answered him , Will you lay down your life for me ? Most certainly I tell you , the rooster wo n't crow until you have denied me three times . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la , Plola o e muiwra mmuat lia ' A wawnu , Petrusa ? ! Mhuoratreria Petrusa , hota hiwi lallu edonna nkukule ' ma'ta de omueh ' a nekpa mrieher doin A lia ' re'eni wotelu .
Do n't let your heart be troubled . Believe in God . Believe also in me . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Upa-a'na miy re , yan ihrami re rteplu . Pesiaymi narur lia Uplerlawna , me narur wial mai A ' u .
In my Father 's house are many homes . If it were n't so , I would have told you . I am going to prepare a place for you . ||| Gen riahu erla A A'mu romni de . Alia ' hande totpena Awuahi ' targa geni tiy miy . A'ukot nohor gen die tiy miy , yoma plollola de genmi erla hande .
If I go and prepare a place for you , I will come again and will receive you to myself , that where I am , you may be there also . ||| La'pa Awuahi ' targa genmi re , nanpena hota A'uwal pia mua wuatrom miy totpa Agod wali miy lia hande , totpena Adiella hanmeni de miy er wal lia .
You know where I go , and you know the way . ||| Mimiat niohora talanni la ' a gen miaka Alia ' de .
Thomas said to him , Lord , we do n't know where you are going . How can we know the way ? ||| Noma Tomsa nakot la Yesus niwra , Matroma , ami e maplinga gen miaka Matro'mu Niwra Nla ' de , pa hota emkameni pa amatga talanni ?
Jesus said to him , I am the way , the truth , and the life . No one comes to the Father , except through me . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Amueh ' a nekpa ed mak khi ' talan la ' a riy mak kiwra kla ' Uplerlawna . Onnila A ' pua rimormiori rat niohora hya ' ed mak kaplol la ' Uplerlawna , me rler la mormiori-dardiari plollola . La'pa riy id mana niwra nmai A'mu de , eneknek to'ama nor A ' tialla , nanpena nwatrom nan A A'mu .
If you had known me , you would have known my Father also . From now on , you know him and have seen him . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , la'pa miy e miatg olek A wua , de hota emkade wal lia miatg oleka A A'mu . Pa la ' dodo'ondi de miy e miatg olek E wa , ne mimkek olek E wa .
Philip said to him , Lord , show us the Father , and that will be enough for us . ||| Noma Pilipsu nakot la Yesus niwra , Matroma , Mtiut tieka Ammu de la mai ami , totpena ralam mamni namtemna .
Jesus said to him , Have I been with you such a long time , and do you not know me , Philip ? He who has seen me has seen the Father . How do you say , ‘ Show us the Father ' ? ||| Mere Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Pilipsia ! Itsol wiut olek la ' mahnek memna . Ne o ' edonna muat mua'ta A ' u ? ! Riy maka kamkek olek A wua , de enamkek oleka A A'mu wali wia . Noma o ' e muiwra Mtiut tieka Am dena ? !
Do n't you believe that I am in the Father , and the Father in me ? The words that I tell you , I speak not from myself , but the Father who lives in me does his works . ||| Pilipsia , o ' edonna mpuesiaya de Agora A A'mu de riy id ami , me Amro ' de Mla ' lir ida ? ! La ' a hya ' maka A'ukota tiy miy , de A lir wamueh ' u atia ' a hade , mere A'mu nor A ' die plola Ampal lia ida , me hya ' maka Aghi ' nan de E ' ed mak ktulla-karia hare honona .
Believe me that I am in the Father , and the Father in me , or else believe me for the very works ' sake . ||| Mpuesiay A ' li'ru mak ukota giwra , Agor A A'mu de riy id ami , me A A'mu de nor A ' die Mla ' lir ida . Onde mpuesiay miemna A lia ' a hihi ' a-yapya'pu mak kamehi-kayona mak Aghi ' oleka re .
Most certainly I tell you , he who believes in me , the works that I do , he will do also , and he will do greater works than these , because I am going to my Father . ||| Plola la ' A li'ru ri . Riy mak kpesiay A ' u , de hota rhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyap miaka Aghi ' oleka re . Meman neka la hota enhi ' de nareh wial lia ' hya ' ed mak Aghi ' a , yoma hota Alia ' pa gor A A'mu la ' geni ida .
Whatever you will ask in my name , I will do it , that the Father may be glorified in the Son . ||| Ne hya ' to ' pa miy mpiaka de yoma mlia ' olek A mu'tu , hota A ' g ed maka kwahi ' a-kwayodia hare tiy miy totpena ya'uli-yawedi nden rer lia A A'mu onnila A hihi ' u-yapya'pu de .
If you will ask anything in my name , I will do it . ||| A'ukot owa'an tiy miy , mpiaka hya ' to ' a , yoma mlia ' oleka A mu'tu , ne hota A ' g ed mak kwahi ' a-kwayodia harella tiy miy .
If you love me , keep my commandments . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , riy maka ksayni A ' die hota e ' wal pia ed mak katlina-katailla A li'ru-tu'nu .
I will pray to the Father , and he will give you another Counselor , that he may be with you forever , ||| Ne hota A ' g ed mak kwak la A'mu ne hota Enala Nhiw Lululli pa Nhernu-nwaug A ' pua Naruri-nalai nian miy , ne hota Nor wut miy pia nodi liarni .
the Spirit of truth , whom the world ca n't receive , for it does n't see him and does n't know him . You know him , for he lives with you and will be in you . ||| Nhiw Lulul die Nwatiawu Uplerlawna , mak kakot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplol la ' Uplerlawna . Nohkerna ta'en niana rreinian E ' a , yoma edonna ramkeka onde ratga E ' a . Mere miy e miatga E ' a . Yoma Enor miy tialla , me hota miora E ' de ihru ida-ralm ida .
I will not leave you orphans . I will come to you . ||| Hota A ' g edonna ultar miy pia emeknekama a'na riy patyata . Hota A'uwali owa'ana tiy miy .
Yet a little while , and the world will see me no more , but you will see me . Because I live , you will live also . ||| Tre ' ma'ta oke ' to ' pa nohkeran di edonna namkek nan A wua . Mere miy die hota mimkek owa'an A ' u . Ne yoma Amuori owa'ana , de hota miy miana mmiormior owa'an wali .
In that day you will know that I am in my Father , and you in me , and I in you . ||| Hota la'pa nte'ela ler maka Amuori owa'ana , de hota miy e miatga de Agora A A'mu de riy id ami , ne miora A ' muana itwalia ida .
One who has my commandments and keeps them , that person is one who loves me . One who loves me will be loved by my Father , and I will love him , and will reveal myself to him . ||| Riy mak kreiniana A li'ru-tu'nu me nlernohora , de e ' ed maka ksayni A ' u . Ne hota A A'mu mana Nsaynia riy mak ksayni A ' u . Ne A ' muana siayn reria riy de , ne Agharia A ino'nu la e ' a .
Judas not Iscariot said to him , Lord , what has happened that you are about to reveal yourself to us , and not to the world ? ||| Dewade Yudas , maka Yudas Iskariot atia ' a , natiana Yesus niwra , Matroma , Omuiwra Mtiut tio ' a O inonmu mai ami , ne nihya'pa O ' edonna Mtiutga la noh di liewnu ?
Jesus answered him , If a man loves me , he will keep my word . My Father will love him , and we will come to him and make our home with him . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Riy mak ksayni A ' u de hota rlernohora A wniatu'tu-wniaye ' u . Pa hota A'mu mana Nsaynia riy de , ne hota Agora A'mu Mahak reria riy de pa Amora Mhol wiutu .
He who does n't love me does n't keep my words . The word which you hear is n't mine , but the Father 's who sent me . ||| Riy mak edonna ksayni A ' u , de hota edonna nlernohora A wniatu'tu . Wniatutu-wniaye ' maka mitlina re hare edonna rwatiawu A ' u , mere ha rwatiawua A'mu mak khopan pa Amuai .
I have said these things to you while still living with you . ||| Hare honona de A'ukot momuoga tiy miy , la ' ler maka A ' g e gor ma'ta miy pia tden wutu .
But the Counselor , the Holy Spirit , whom the Father will send in my name , will teach you all things , and will remind you of all that I said to you . ||| Mere la'pa A lia A'mu de , A'mu Nala Nhiw Lululli pa Nma Nala ruri-lai tiy miy . Hota Nhiw Lulul die Nmai lia A na'nu wawannu . Ne E ' ed mak kwatutga haneknek wawannu tiy miy , ne Nwagahniorta miy lia hya ' maka Awuatutg olek tiy miy wia .
Peace I leave with you . My peace I give to you , not as the world gives , I give to you . Do n't let your heart be troubled , neither let it be fearful . ||| Hota Agal miy pia mlier la ralam mtiertierannu pa emeknekama A ralmu mana namtiertiernu la ' haneknek wawannu . Ralam mtiertierannu mak emkade , nohkerna naplin niohora ma'ta de . Pede upa-a'na miy re , yana mpiarna plahwa-plahwa me yana msiusa onde mimta'ata .
You heard how I told you , ‘ I am going away , and I will come back to you . ' If you loved me , you would have rejoiced because I said ‘ I am going to my Father , ' for the Father is greater than I . ||| Mitlina A li'ru mak A'ukot oleka de hota Alia'awa , mere hota A'uwal tiy miy . La'pa msiayni A ' u , de hota mihepru onnila Alia ' a A'mu de , yoma E inponni reh dioin A ' u .
Now I have told you before it happens so that when it happens , you may believe . ||| A ' g e ukot ulga hare tiy miy lia ' dodo'ondi , mere la hare id mana edon tamkek ma'ta . Totpena la'pa mimkeka la repra onde walli , de mpiesiaya .
I will no more speak much with you , for the prince of the world comes , and he has nothing in me . ||| A ' g edonna ultier pia naplahwa , yoma lera nnielu inhatti pa hota hegana amlawanni mak kodi plolli la noha wawannu de nmai wia . Mere hota e ' edonna nodia plolli mai A ' u .
But that the world may know that I love the Father , and as the Father commanded me , even so I do . Arise , let 's go from here . ||| Mere hota Aghur niohora pa Alier la matmia'tu ralamni totpa Aliernohora hya ' ed maka A'mu Nhopan mai A ' u . Totpena la ' hade pede nohkeran di mniotni ratga de A ' g e siaynia A A'mu . Ne emkade nek wa pa mai pia twatitin la handi wa !
I am the true vine , and my Father is the farmer . ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia lir yawalliohora pa Nakot owa'ana Niwra , A ' di de anggur lokrahi ona plollolli inhat A ' u . Me A A'mu de ora nhyi ' a inhatta .
Every branch in me that does n't bear fruit , he takes away . Every branch that bears fruit , he prunes , that it may bear more fruit . ||| A tu'tu-a'ku rimormiori miy . La'pa A tu'tu-a'ku mak kakleh wo ' a , de hota Ora nhyi ' de e Nhamin doinia la , ne la ak miak kawo ' a de Enamou dioinia tawni la , totpena na'unu-nayeh owa'ana .
You are already pruned clean because of the word which I have spoken to you . ||| Miy di de er mak kmou-kwitna olekwa yoma la ' a A wniatu'tu tiy miy .
Remain in me , and I in you . As the branch ca n't bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine , so neither can you , unless you remain in me . ||| Yana olietmi mai A ' u me hota A ' wual pia edon oliet tiy miy . Yoma ta'en niana miy mhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kalwiedweda atiaru mior A ' tialla . Pa hota emeknekama ha'aki ida mak edon kawo ' a , atiaru ak die natniapal rer lia onni .
I am the vine . You are the branches . He who remains in me and I in him bears much fruit , for apart from me you can do nothing . ||| A ' di de emeknekama anggur ona A ' u , me miy die emeknekama anggur on de tutnu-akni miy . Riy mak kden rer lia mai A ' u , me A ' muana dien rer lia e ' a , de hota emeknekama tutu-aki mak ka'unu-kayeha , yoma A ' g edonna gor miy , de hota emeknekama mikleh wo ' a .
If a man does n't remain in me , he is thrown out as a branch and is withered , and they gather them , throw them into the fire , and they are burned . ||| Riy maka edonna kden rer miai A ' u , de emekwalima anggur aki mak edon ka'unu-kayeha maka rhamin doinia la , me la'pa nkern olekwa de rawoka pa rnaklia la ai ralamni .
If you remain in me , and my words remain in you , you will ask whatever you desire , and it will be done for you . ||| La'pa mdien rer mai A ' u , me mhioratreria mak Awuatut niana re , de hya ' maka mpiahaka de , mpiaka la A'mu , ne hota Enala tiy miy .
In this my Father is glorified , that you bear much fruit , and so you will be my disciples . ||| Ne la'pa hihi'imi-yapyapmi re de emeknekama tutu-ak mak wo'oni harahu , de hota la ' hade pede riwra plola miy er maklernohor reri A ' u . Emkade pede hihi'imi-yapyapmi re hota rodia ya'uli-yawed lia A A'mu .
Even as the Father has loved me , I also have loved you . Remain in my love . ||| Emekwalima A'mu Nsayni A ' u , de A ' muana A ' g e siayn wali miy . Pa hota miy miana mdien rer lia A sniaynu .
If you keep my commandments , you will remain in my love , even as I have kept my Father 's commandments and remain in his love . ||| De , la'pa mliernohora hya ' mak A'ukot taru , de miy e mdien reri olek la A sniaynu , pa emekwalima A ' g e dien rer lia A A'mu sniayanni , yoma Aliernohora hya ' ed maka Nhopna mai A ' u .
I have spoken these things to you , that my joy may remain in you , and that your joy may be made full . ||| La ' hari honona de A'ukot momuoga tiy miy totpena A ralam yahepru de etla miy ralammi , ne miy miana mihepur toto ' memna .
This is my commandment , that you love one another , even as I have loved you . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , mitlina-mitailla hya ' mak A'ukota di , de emkadilla , hota miy idma nhi ' a kalwiedwed ida , pa emeka hya ' maka nhi'inde Aghi ' a tiy miy die .
Greater love has no one than this , that someone lay down his life for his friends . ||| Riy maka khoi inonni la matmiatni yoma la ' a talanwalli rerieini , de e ed mak ktutga tniulanni-sniayanni maka kreh dioinia tniulla-sniayni re honona .
You are my friends if you do whatever I command you . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , la'pa mliernohora hya ' ed maka A'ukot tiy miy , de hota miy die mpiali olek la A talanwa'lu .
No longer do I call you servants , for the servant does n't know what his lord does . But I have called you friends , for everything that I heard from my Father , I have made known to you . ||| Pede hota A ' g edonna puol miy lia A hopopnu , yoma hopopan de naplin tiar lia hya ' maka upni-matromni nhi ' a . Mere Apuol miy lia ' A talanwa'lu , yoma hare honona maka utlin nana la A'mu , de A'ukot oleka tiy miy wia .
You did n't choose me , but I chose you and appointed you , that you should go and bear fruit , and that your fruit should remain , that whatever you will ask of the Father in my name , he may give it to you . ||| Miy edonna mpialir nian A ' u , mere A ' g ed mak kwalir nian miy , ne Aghopan pa mlia mhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kodi liarni pa emeknekama tutu-ak mak ka'unu-kayeh rer niohora wo ' samomuounu . La'pa mhi ' emkade de hota A'mu Nala hya ' maka mpiaka la E ' a onnila mlia ' olek A mu'tu-rah ' u .
I command these things to you , that you may love one another . ||| Me Aghopan miy , upa-a'na miy re , totpa miy idma natu ntulla-nsayni ida .
If the world hates you , you know that it has hated me before it hated you . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , la'pa nohkeran di sukni tia ' tiy miy , de mhioratreria , A ' g ed maka hare sukni tia ' ulia .
If you were of the world , the world would love its own . But because you are not of the world , since I chose you out of the world , therefore the world hates you . ||| La'pa nohkerna gahani miy , de meman neka la nohkerna nsayn miy , yoma mlier la nohkerna gahani ! Mere A ' g ed maka kwalir nian miy lia ' nohkeran di , pede miy di de nohkerna gahani atia ' a miy . La ' hade pede nohkeran di gaini npetan rer tiy miy .
Remember the word that I said to you , ‘ A servant is not greater than his lord . ' If they persecuted me , they will also persecute you . If they kept my word , they will also keep yours . ||| Mhioratreria la ' a hya ' a maka A'ukot taru oleka re giwra , Riy rnahora-rnala ' olek A ' u , de hota rnahora-rnala ' wali miy . La'pa irlernohor A wniatu'tu , de hota rlernohora walia miy wniatutmi yoma hopopna edonna narehelia upni-matromni .
But they will do all these things to you for my name 's sake , because they do n't know him who sent me . ||| Hota rnahora-rnala ' miy yoma mliernohora olek A wua . Ir rhi ' emkade yoma ir edonna ratga E ' a Mak khopn A ' u .
If I had not come and spoken to them , they would not have had sin , but now they have no excuse for their sin . ||| La'pa A ' g edonna muai pia ukot nohor ma'ta Uplerlawna talanni la ir de , de hota Uplerlawna edonna Nwaghal ira . Mere la ' dodo'ondi de A'ukot nohora olek la ira , mere ir edon rlernohora A li'ru , pede hota emkameni owa'an pa ir riwra ir edon rhala ? !
He who hates me , hates my Father also . ||| Riy maka ralamni edon nreinian A ' u de hade edonna nreiniana A'mu wali .
If I had n't done among them the works which no one else did , they would n't have had sin . But now they have seen and also hated both me and my Father . ||| La'pa A ' g edon ghi ' ma't hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak riy edon ramkek taru re la ' a ir wokni-le'enu de hota Uplerlawna edon Nwaghal ira . Mere iramkek oleka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak Aghi ' nan la dodo'ondi , mere ir sukni atia ' ma'ta mai A ' u me la ' walia A'mu .
But this happened so that the word may be fulfilled which was written in their law , ‘ They hated me without a cause . ' ||| Ha rhi ' nan emkade totpa plola la hya ' maka kden la ' ir Puk deullu-tatarni mak kiwra , Irahankeran la mai A ' die rakleha wniatikilgeni alasan .
When the Counselor has come , whom I will send to you from the Father , the Spirit of truth , who proceeds from the Father , he will testify about me . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , hota Aghopan doinia Maka rhoiya la Mak khi ' aruri-alai die tiy miy . Enwatiawua A'mu pa ntiy . De rwet Hadella Nhiw Lululli mak kakot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplol la Uplerlawna . La'pa hota Enmai die Enakot nohor walia A ' u .
You will also testify , because you have been with me from the beginning . ||| Ne hota miy miana er mak kakot nohora walia A lia ' rira , yoma miy er mak kor rewre ' w A ' u lia ' ler maka Atie'la la A knia'ru la ' nohkeran di .
I have said these things to you so that you would n't be caused to stumble . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , la ' hare honona de A'ukota tiy miy , totpena yana miwlar dioinia pesiaymi pa hota mlier la klieratni .
They will put you out of the synagogues . Yes , the time is coming that whoever kills you will think that he offers service to God . ||| Yoma hota ralgot miy lia ' a gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli . Ne plollolli de hota ntutu-nte'ela lerni-melli de , pa riy mak kwenan miy re ratniekame e rhi ' emkade yoma Uplerlawna hopopanni ira .
They will do these things because they have not known the Father nor me . ||| Mere plollolli de , ir rhi ' hare tiy miy , yoma ir edonna rat niohora ma'ta Agora A'mu .
But I have told you these things so that when the time comes , you may remember that I told you about them . I did n't tell you these things from the beginning , because I was with you . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , la ' dodo'ondi de A'ukot nohor kropna-krieutu polpuol ina-wakwak ama honona re tiy miy , totpena la'pa ler meni miy mliernan hare , de yana mhieduma , mere mhioratreria hare honona de A'ukot ulg oleka tiy miy wia . La ' mulaliaini de A ' g edonna ukot hare honona tiy miy , yoma A ' g e gor ma'ta miy pa tsol wiut pua Atiulan tiy miy .
But now I am going to him who sent me , and none of you asks me , ‘ Where are you going ? ' ||| La'pa dodo'ondi wa de Agiwra lia'awa la Uplerlawna mak khopn A ' u , pa Agor E ' pa Mhol wiutu , mere hota riy id tiy miy miana edon natian nohora hota Alia ' hanmeni .
But because I have told you these things , sorrow has filled your heart . ||| La ' dodo'ondi de miy ralammi nmolu-nhelam meman nohora lir maka A ' g e ukot oleka de giwra hota Alia ' E ' de .
Nevertheless I tell you the truth , It is to your advantage that I go away , for if I do n't go away , the Counselor wo n't come to you . But if I go , I will send him to you . ||| Mere upa-a'na miy re , mpiesiayo ! Onnila miy rerieimi pede samounu de , Alia ' nek wa ! Yoma la'pa A ' g edonna lia ' a , de hota Uplerlawna Nhiwni mak kodi ruri-lai tiy miy die , hota edon Nmai . Mere la'pa Alia'awa , de totpena Aghopan doinia pa Nmai wia .
When he has come , he will convict the world about sin , about righteousness , and about judgment , ||| La'pa Enmai die , de hota Enakot nohora riy mak kden la nohkeran di wawannu de Niwra irhi ' oleka do ' a-hala , me Enakot nohor wal lia ' hya ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , la'pa Nakot nohora wal lia ' Uplerlawna niukamnu .
about sin , because they do n't believe in me , ||| Yoma Enmai die , de Nakot la riy Niwra e rhi ' oleka do ' a-hala yoma ir edon rpesiay A ' u .
about righteousness , because I am going to my Father , and you wo n't see me any more , ||| Ne Nakot nohora wali A hihi ' u-yapya'pu re er mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Hota irat niohora A ' g ed mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni yoma Alia ' A'mu de , ne la ' ler de miy edonna mimkek olek A wua .
about judgment , because the prince of this world has been judged . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nhiwni de ed mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna niukamnu yala'ani la ' rimormiori nohkeran di . Yoma nla'aw olek la lerni pa Uplerlawna Nukmua hegana amlawanni mak kodi plolli la nohkerna wawannu .
I still have many things to tell you , but you ca n't bear them now . ||| Upa-a'nami re , harahu er ma'ta la pa Agiwra ukota tiy miy , mere la ' dodo'ondi de ta'en niana mnia'erit nana , pede yan nek wa .
However , when he , the Spirit of truth , has come , he will guide you into all truth , for he will not speak from himself , but whatever he hears , he will speak . He will declare to you things that are coming . ||| Mere la'pa Nhiw die Nmai wia , de hota E ' ed maka kakot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplol la ' Uplerlawna , ne hota E ' ed mak kawiru-kawewal miy , totpena miat niohora momuoga plollolli ha nlolola . Hota E Naltier die E ' edonna Nlernohora E ralma-rior wamueheni , mere Nakot nohora hya ' maka Natlin nana , me Enakota tiy miy la ' a hya ' maka hota kmai lia repra-walli .
He will glorify me , for he will take from what is mine and will declare it to you . ||| E ' mana hota Nhi ' pa Aliernana ya'uli-yawedi , yoma lir maka Nakota la tiy miy die Nlernan harella mai A ' u .
All things that the Father has are mine , therefore I said that he takes of mine and will declare it to you . ||| Maka plollola re honona mak kwatiawua A'mu de , A ' muana ukot nohor mamainia hare . La ' hade pede A ' g e ukota tiy miy giwra la ' a lira hya ' maka Nhiwa Nakota tiy miy , de Ha Nlernan harella mai A ' u .
A little while , and you will not see me . Again a little while , and you will see me . ||| Hota edon nalo'on wali ne miy edonna mlina-miat mimkeka A wua , mere edon nalo'on wal pia mimkek owa'an A ' u .
Some of his disciples therefore said to one another , What is this that he says to us , ‘ A little while , and you wo n't see me , and again a little while , and you will see me , ' and , ‘ Because I go to the Father ' ? ||| La ' pa Yesus Nakot emkade pa nhorwua noma riy wo'ira maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , idma natian ida riwra , La ' a hya ' pede Niwra hota edon nalo'on wali ne it edonna tlina-tmat tamkek E ' a , nhor nioma Niwra mere hota edon nalo'on wal owa'an pa itamkek owa'an E ' a , me Enakot walia Niwra onnila Nawal lia Amni ?
They said therefore , What is this that he says , ‘ A little while ' ? We do n't know what he is saying . ||| Idma natiantan rer ida riwra , La'pa Niwra edon nalo'on wali , de ha nnia'eratni de hya ' a de ?
Therefore Jesus perceived that they wanted to ask him , and he said to them , Do you inquire among yourselves concerning this , that I said , ‘ A little while , and you wo n't see me , and again a little while , and you will see me ' ? ||| Yesus Nat niohora de iriwra ratian E ' a pede Enakot la re Niwra , Dodo'ona A'ukot oleka tiy miy Agiwra , Edon nalo'on wali , ne hota miy edonna mimkek A ' u . Ne la ' walia hota edon nalo'on wal owa'an pa mimkek owa'an A ' u . Hade ed maka miy mitiana toh ? !
Most certainly I tell you that you will weep and lament , but the world will rejoice . You will be sorrowful , but your sorrow will be turned into joy . ||| Mpiesiayo , hota la ' ler maka Alia'awa , de mkiakur nande mipolu-mitniani mere nohkeran di mniotni de hota plele ' u-tartiarni ramuki-rahepru . Hota miy ralamni rkakru , mere kniakurmi de hota nwal lia yahepru-yamali .
A woman , when she gives birth , has sorrow because her time has come . But when she has delivered the child , she does n't remember the anguish any more , for the joy that a human being is born into the world . ||| Itala patke ' a ida pa tsi ' a la yawalliohora . Pat mak ka'apnu la'pa nhi ' pa nmor wia , de polpuolu-hawaun nohora apun mehrani . Mere la'pa ntor doinia a'nani , dewade mehra-mau re lol hamamuamua . Yoma ntor oleka rimormiori id la ' a noha wawannu , pede narieinian de kaniha-kamal niohora a'nani de .
Therefore you now have sorrow , but I will see you again , and your heart will rejoice , and no one will take your joy away from you . ||| Hota emkade wali tiy miy . La ' dodo'ondi de miy ralammi rmayo ' a-rmatau niohor A ' u . Mere la'pa Amuai owa'an pa gor miy twatroma , de hota miy kaniha-kamalmi , ne la ' riy id mana hota edonna nwarui niana niniha-malmial die tiy miy .
In that day you will ask me no questions . Most certainly I tell you , whatever you may ask of the Father in my name , he will give it to you . ||| Hota la ' ler de miy edonna mitian la ' a-mitian mai owa'an A ' u . Mpiesiayo , hota la ' ler de miodi liarmi pa mpiak nek la A'mu , ne hya ' ed maka ha mpiaka la E ' a , yoma mlier olek la A mu'tu , de hota E ' ed mak kala tiy miy .
Until now , you have asked nothing in my name . Ask , and you will receive , that your joy may be made full . ||| La ululu memna pa nodia la ' ler di de miy mlia ' A mu'tu-rah ' u , mere miy edonna mpiak mia'ta hadom la A A'mu . Mere A'ukot to miy , la dodo'ondi de mpiak nek wa ne hota mliernana , totpena hota mimuki-mihepur toto ' memna .
I have spoken these things to you in figures of speech . But the time is coming when I will no more speak to you in figures of speech , but will tell you plainly about the Father . ||| A'ukota hari honona tiy miy die A ' g e niairia lira yawalliohora . Mere edon nalo'on wali ne A ' g edonna niairia lira yawalliohora owa'ana , mere A'ukot nohora A'mu de tiy miy die , Atio'pi-gauria li'ru-tu'nu .
In that day you will ask in my name , and I do n't say to you that I will pray to the Father for you , ||| Pa hota A ' g edonna wuak la A'mu la ' a miy rerieimi , mere la ' ler de hota miy mieh ' a neka miodi liarmi pa mpiak nek la A'mu , yoma miy er maklernohor reri A ' u . Ne hota Enatlin tiy miy .
for the Father himself loves you , because you have loved me , and have believed that I came from God . ||| Yoma A'mu nek de Ensayn wenna miy . Ensayn miy , yoma mimsiaynia A ' u ne mpiesiay wialia de A ' di de wuatiawu Uplerlawna .
I came from the Father and have come into the world . Again , I leave the world and go to the Father . ||| Plola ! Awuatiawua A'mu de pa Agerun la noh di wawannu . Mere la dodo'ondi de Awuatitin la ' noha wawannu pa uwal lia A'mu de .
His disciples said to him , Behold , now you are speaking plainly , and using no figures of speech . ||| Noma maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rakot la Yesus riwra , Dodo'ondi de Matro'mu Nto'pi-ngauria lira ri de edonna Nnairia oleka yawalliohora .
Now we know that you know all things , and do n't need for anyone to question you . By this we believe that you came from God . ||| Ne amatga de ami edon matian la ' a-mai lia Matro'mu mana , Matro'mu Natg oleka hya ' mak kdella a ihru mamni-ralam mamni maka amiwra matiana . Hade ed mak kariei piede amatga , de Matro'mu Nwatiawu Uplerlawna pa Nmai .
Jesus answered them , Do you now believe ? ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Hota mpiesiaya la dodo'ondi wa ? !
Behold , the time is coming , yes , and has now come , that you will be scattered , everyone to his own place , and you will leave me alone . Yet I am not alone , because the Father is with me . ||| Mhioratreria ! Hota la'pa nte'ela lerni , ne ed olekwa di pa miwlar dioinia A lia pa miwal lia genmi-tien wamuehemi , ne miltarga Amuemeh ' a . Mere A ' g edonna muemeh ' a yoma A'mu e Nor A ' tialla .
I have told you these things , that in me you may have peace . In the world you have trouble , but cheer up ! I have overcome the world . ||| A'ukot hare honona totpena mlier la ralam mtiertierannu yoma mior olek A ' pua twal lia id wa . La ' noh keran di wawannu de hota mlier la kropna-krieutu , mere mhi ' ralammi re pa raruri ! Yoma A'utowr oleka nohkeran di rurni-laini .
Jesus said these things , then lifting up his eyes to heaven , he said , Father , the time has come . Glorify your Son , that your Son may also glorify you , ||| La'pa Nakot hare honona pa nhorwua dewade Yesus Nwatniar la heyanan na'nama Niwra , Ama , dodo'ondi de nte ' olek la lerni-melli mak Ompualir niana . Awuak pa A'mu Ntutga A preh ' u-mka'yu totpa hota ha ramkek nana . Ne hota la ' hade pede A'namu A ' mana hota godi ya'uli-yawed tiy O ' a .
even as you gave him authority over all flesh , so he will give eternal life to all whom you have given him . ||| Ama , Omual olek A ' pua Agodi plolli la rimormiori nohkerna wawannu re , totpena la ' a plola-mneha mak A'mu Nala A ' die , de A ' g ed mak kala mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni la ' a riy honona maka A'mu Nala mai A ' u .
This is eternal life , that they should know you , the only true God , and him whom you sent , Jesus Christ . ||| Ne mormiori plalahwa de nnia'eratni de totpena rimormiori ratga A'mu , de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu inhatta , ne totpena rat niohor walia A ' u , de Yesus Kristus , maka A'mu e Nhopan nana .
I glorified you on the earth . I have accomplished the work which you have given me to do . ||| Ama , Agodi oleka ya'uli-yawedi tiy O ' a la nohkerna wawannu di , la ' a Aghi ' ahorga tulanmu-kniarmu mak A'mu Nala pa Akari .
Now , Father , glorify me with your own self with the glory which I had with you before the world existed . ||| Ama , Awuak pa Muod owa'an A pua Agor O ' pa itden rer lia ita ya'ulli-yawedni plolli-mneheni wawannu emekwalima la ' ler maka noha gergera-tatiah ma'ta .
I revealed your name to the people whom you have given me out of the world . They were yours , and you have given them to me . They have kept your word . ||| Ama , mutmu-rahamu mak kden la noh di wawannu maka Muala mai A ' u , de A ' g e ukot nohor oleka A'mu la ir wa . Ne ir rlernohor olek A'mu lirni-tunnu .
Now they have known that all things whatever you have given me are from you , ||| Dodo'ondi de iratg oleka lira-tun maka A'ukot nohor oleka la ira me hare honona mak Aghi ' a , de plol toto ' a rwatiawu A'mu .
for the words which you have given me I have given to them , and they received them , and knew for sure that I came from you . They have believed that you sent me . ||| Yoma A'ukot olek la ir wa lira-tun muaka A'mu Nala mai A ' u , ne rreinian oleka lir de wa . Iratga de plola Awuatiawua A'mu , me rpesiaya de A'mu ed mak khopn A ' u .
I pray for them . I do n't pray for the world , but for those whom you have given me , for they are yours . ||| Ama , Asiumbain la ira . A ' g edonna siumbain la nohkeran di , mere Atiot nan to ' a riy mak A'mu Nala mai A ' u re , yoma A'mu gahani ira .
All things that are mine are yours , and yours are mine , and I am glorified in them . ||| Riy mak A gah ' u honona re , de A'mu gahani walia re , ne rimormiori mak A'mu gahani honona re de Agah ' u walia re . Ne la ' a ir pede Alier la ya'uli-yawedi .
I am no more in the world , but these are in the world , and I am coming to you . Holy Father , keep them through your name which you have given me , that they may be one , even as we are . ||| Dodo'ondi Amuai A'mu de . Hota A ' g edonna diel owa'an la nohkerna wawannu . Mere hota ir er ma'ta la ' nohkerna wawannu . A'mu mak kden mou-witna plola-mneha wawannu ! Muala plolmu-mnehemu , prehemu-mkaimu ma Mhuapet reria re . Plolmu-mnehemu de inhatta ed maka A'mu Nal olek mai A ' u . A'mu , Muala plolmu-mnehemu ma Mhuapet reria re totpena nreiy awutga rla ida , pa emekwalia Agora A'mu wal die ida .
While I was with them in the world , I kept them in your name . I have kept those whom you have given me . None of them is lost except the son of destruction , that the Scripture might be fulfilled . ||| La ' lera-mela ri mak Agor wut ma't ira de Agala O rurmu-laimu plolmu-mnehemu maka A'mu Nala mai A ' u pa ga ' utiak ira . A'utiaka rpa honona rden la kalwiedwedni , enekneka riy id maka rakot targ oleka de pa na'olga A ' u ne nler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni . Had emkade totpena maka rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de rtutu-rte'ewa .
But now I come to you , and I say these things in the world , that they may have my joy made full in themselves . ||| Dodo'ondi A ' g e muai O ' de Ama , A ' g e ukot nohora A wakwa'ku honona ri tiy O ' a , la ' A ' g ed ma'ta la noha wawannu , totpena rahepuepur toto ' memna emekwali mai A ' u .
I have given them your word . The world hated them because they are not of the world , even as I am not of the world . ||| A'ukot nohora oleka A'mu lirni-tunnu la ir wa , ne nohkerna rahankeran rer lia ira , yoma ir de nohkerna gahani atia ' ira , pa emekwalima A ' muana nohkerna gahani atia ' wali A ' u .
I pray not that you would take them from the world , but that you would keep them from the evil one . ||| A ' g edonna wuak pa totpena A'mu Na'ala ir la ' nohkeran di wawannu , mere Awuak totpena A'mu Natiak ir la ' hegana amlawanni mak khi ' yatyatni-halalli .
They are not of the world , even as I am not of the world . ||| Emekwalima la ' A ' di de , nohkerna gahani atia ' A ' u , la'pa ir mana nohkerna gahani atia ' wali ira .
Sanctify them in your truth . Your word is truth . ||| Muala O lirmu-tunmu mak kden la plol wawannu ma mhi ' ir la ' O gah wamuehemu mak kakleha do ' a-hala , Ama .
As you sent me into the world , even so I have sent them into the world . ||| Emeknekama A'mu Nhopna Agerun la noha wawannu , de emkade wal lia Aghopan pa e rla rakot nohora A ' u la noha wawannu .
For their sakes I sanctify myself , that they themselves also may be sanctified in truth . ||| Ir er mak karei pia Agala A ino'nu la A'mu pa liernohora A'mu ralma-rior wamueheni , totpena hota ir mana rla ' walia A'mu gah wamueheni pa rhima-rre ' A'mu , yoma ir pesiayni la O lirmu-tunmu mak kden la plol wawannu .
Not for these only do I pray , but for those also who will believe in me through their word , ||| Ama , A ' g edonna siumbain to'ola la ' hari rmeh ' a , mere la ' walia la ' riy maka klernohora ir lirni pa rpesiay A ' u .
that they may all be one , even as you , Father , are in me , and I in you , that they also may be one in us , that the world may believe that you sent me . ||| De Awuak la A'mu totpena ir honona rla lir ida emeka itro ' a . Awuak de ir ror it pa riy id ita totpena nohkeran di npesiaya de , A'mu ed mak khopn A ' u .
The glory which you have given me , I have given to them , that they may be one , even as we are one , ||| Aghi ' pa rlernan walia ya'uli-yawedi pa emeknekama A'mu Nhi ' A ' pua Alier la ya'uli-yawedi , totpena irden rer lia ida , emekwali itro ' pa twalia id wali .
I in them , and you in me , that they may be perfected into one , that the world may know that you sent me and loved them , even as you loved me . ||| De Agor ira , me A'mu nor A ' u totpena la ' it de plol toto ' pa twal lia ida . Totpena nohkeran di natga , de A'mu O ' ed mak khopn A ' u me A'mu ed mak ksaynia ira , pa emekwalima Omsiayn wali A ' u .
Father , I desire that they also whom you have given me be with me where I am , that they may see my glory which you have given me , for you loved me before the foundation of the world . ||| Ama , Awuak de , riy mak A'mu Nala mai A ' u re , er wal lia A ge'nu , totpena ramkek memna ya'uli-yawedi mai A ' u , mak A'mu orgahani Nala mai A ' u , yoma A'mu ed mak ksayni A ' u , la ' nohkerna gergera-tatiah mia'ta .
Righteous Father , the world has n't known you , but I knew you , and these knew that you sent me . ||| Ama , O ' ed mak ktutga plolmu-mnehemu la yaweratni-yatailli . Nohkerna edonna natg O ' a , mere A ' g e gatg O ' a , ne hari mana iratga de A'mu ed mak khopn A ' u .
I made known to them your name , and will make it known , that the love with which you loved me may be in them , and I in them . ||| A'ukot nohor olek A'mu la ir wa , ne hota ghi ' hare pa nodi liarni , totpena iratu rsaynia ir rimormior wialli pa emekwalima A'mu Nsayn wali A ' u , me totpena Agor ir pa mden rer lia lir ida me woka-le ' g ida .
When Jesus had spoken these words , he went out with his disciples over the brook Kidron , where there was a garden , into which he and his disciples entered . ||| La'pa Yesus Nsumbaini emkade , dewade Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re pa rla'awa la ' gera tliwu kali Kidron walli la ' a nhyi ' a mak kpenpuen niohora au saitun . Noma Yesus Nora mak ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rler la nhyi ' de ralamni .
Now Judas , who betrayed him , also knew the place , for Jesus often met there with his disciples . ||| Mere Yudas mak ka'olga Yesus de nat niohor oleka gen diewa , yoma nhi'inde Yesus Nora maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re mana rawok la hande wali .
Judas then , having taken a detachment of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees , came there with lanterns , torches , and weapons . ||| Pa Yudas nmai die ni'it nana riy makodi keki-rautu Romawi lidanni ida me la ' walia maka nhi'inde katiaka Uplerlawna roma kreini , pa rmai rewre'wa yoma imam-imam re o'tani-matni rora riy Parisi er mak khopna . Rmai die rawtutu'tu la keki-rautu , me hulu-wa'du .
Jesus therefore , knowing all the things that were happening to him , went out and said to them , Who are you looking for ? ||| Yesus Nat niohora momuoga hya ' maka hota ha rhi ' a la E ' a . Noma Yesus Nla Nwakriania ira pa Natiana re Niwra , Miy e mpiahak he ' a ?
They answered him , Jesus of Nazareth . Jesus said to them , I am he . Judas also , who betrayed him , was standing with them . ||| Noma rwahla riwra , Amahak Yesus riy Nasaret de . Dewade Yesus orgahani nekpa Nwalolla Niwra , A ' g inhatti . Nakot emkade de Yudas mana et wal lia hande .
When therefore he said to them , I am he , they went backward and fell to the ground . ||| La'pa Yesus Niwra , A ' g inhatti , dewade honona rod wikni ne rwag onni la tankierna yoma rlitri-rpurna .
Again therefore he asked them , Who are you looking for ? They said , Jesus of Nazareth . ||| La'pa ralamni owa'an pa Yesus Natiana re Niwra , Miy e mihak he ' a ? Noma rwalolla riwra , Yesus riy Nasaret de .
Jesus answered , I told you that I am he . If therefore you seek me , let these go their way , ||| Yesus Niwra , A'ukot oleka de A ' g eda di . Ne la'pa plol toto'pa miy e mpiahak A ' u , de miolin doin mak Awuatutu-wuaye ' a re pa rla'awa .
that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke , Of those whom you have given me , I have lost none . ||| Yesus Nakot emkade , totpena lir maka Yesus Nakot ulu re raplola . Yoma Eniwra , Riy maka Omuala mai A ' u re , A'utiaka ir honona pa rden la kalwiedwedni .
Simon Peter therefore , having a sword , drew it , struck the high priest 's servant , and cut off his right ear . The servant 's name was Malchus . ||| Dewade Simon Petrus mak ktorreria wehla plalahwa de nleh dioinia wehlani pa ndawar doinia Malkus tlinni walli malganna . Malkus di ed makla ' hopopan la imam-imam re o'ta lawanni .
Jesus therefore said to Peter , Put the sword into its sheath . The cup which the Father has given me , shall I not surely drink it ? ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Petrus Niwra , Hoi ! Mkienia wehlamu della paro'oni ! O ' edon muat niohora de Awuayow pa Alier la kropna-krieutu maka A'mu Nakot targa mai A ' u ? !
So the detachment , the commanding officer , and the officers of the Jews seized Jesus and bound him , ||| Noma makodi keki-rautu Romawi ror wutga ir o'tani me la walia mak katiak reria Yahudi kreini re rtorna Yesus pa rwutga .
and led him to Annas first , for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas , who was high priest that year . ||| Rodi ulga Yesus la ' Kayafas pananni Hanas de . La ' anin de Kayafas ed makhi ' o'ta lawna la ' a imam-imam re .
Now it was Caiaphas who advised the Jews that it was expedient that one man should perish for the people . ||| Ne e ' ed maka kano ' a-ka'atg ulg oleka mak kodi plolli la Yahudi niwra , Miolin doinia la pa riy ida nmat lia ' a luwu-a'na riwnu-halli wawannu .
Simon Peter followed Jesus , as did another disciple . Now that disciple was known to the high priest , and entered in with Jesus into the court of the high priest , ||| La ' ler de de Simon Petrus nora mutwualli id mak kre ' wut lia riy mak Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re rlernohor reria Yesus . Imam-imam o'ta lawanni de natg oleka Simon Petrus mutwualli de pede enlernohor Yesus pa nla'awa la ' a makla ' o'ta lawna romni gaini , la riwta ralamni .
but Peter was standing at the door outside . So the other disciple , who was known to the high priest , went out and spoke to her who kept the door , and brought in Peter . ||| Mere o'ta lawanni naplin niohor ma'ta Petrus , pede Petrus nwei tiar la ' a riwta to'orni la ' nhiari onni . Dewade Petrus mutwualli de nla pa nakot la hopopan pat mak katiaka nhiari , totpena nodia Petrus pa nre'ela nmai lia rialma . Noma nmai lia rialma .
Then the maid who kept the door said to Peter , Are you also one of this man 's disciples ? He said , I am not . ||| Noma pat mak katiaka nhiar die nakot la Petrus niwra , Oi , A ' g edon ghal de , O ' di de maklernohor reria Yesus id wali o ' toh ? ! Noma Petrus nrehera niwra , Ow , A ' g edonna !
Now the servants and the officers were standing there , having made a fire of coals , for it was cold . They were warming themselves . Peter was with them , standing and warming himself . ||| La ' mel de , de woki lawan rehia , nhi'nande mak katiaka re rora mak ktulla-kar lia hande radunia ai kwiari me rtutrier pia ramriria , noma Petrus mana nre ' teman la ira pa namriri ai .
The high priest therefore asked Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching . ||| La ' ler de Hanas makla ' imam-imam o'ta lawanni , natian nohora maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re la ' Yesus me la ' walia E wniatutnu-wniaye'eni .
Jesus answered him , I spoke openly to the world . I always taught in synagogues and in the temple , where the Jews always meet . I said nothing in secret . ||| Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , Nhi'inde A'ultier die Atio'pi-gauria A li'ru-tu'nu la ' a mutlialawna gaini ralamni . Nhi'inde A ' g e wuatut lia ' roma-lewu maka Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli me la ' wal lia Uplerlawna roma kreini , maka nhi'inde riy Yahudi rden mamain la . Nhi'inde A ' g edonna ukot targa lir yawunwunamnu .
Why do you ask me ? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them . Behold , they know the things which I said . ||| Noma hya ' nrei pia tuna natian A ' u ? Mutian neka ir wa maka nhi'inde kden pa Awuatutu-wuaye ' a . Hota irwahauria de plola !
When he had said this , one of the officers standing by slapped Jesus with his hand , saying , Do you answer the high priest like that ? ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot emkare , dewade riy mak katiaka ida nwalo'ma Yesus nurnu na'nama nakot la niwra , Oi , O nurmu fiekatni la imam o'ta lawanni de nee ! O edonna mumta'ata de ?
Jesus answered him , If I have spoken evil , testify of the evil , but if well , why do you beat me ? ||| Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , La'pa A li'ru ri rhala de mikot teka hameni ed mak khala . Mere la'pa mak A'ukota ri raplola , de hya ' a ed mak krei piede ompualo'ma A nu'ru ?
Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas , the high priest . ||| Nhor nioma Hanas nhopan pa rodia Yesus de limni nawniut niekpa rokria Kayafas makla ' imam o'ta lawanni wali .
Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself . They said therefore to him , You are n't also one of his disciples , are you ? He denied it and said , I am not . ||| La ' dodo'on de meman pa Petrus , namrir mia't ai dewade rira rakot la riwra , Yanpa o ' di de maklernohor reri E ' a id o ' a ? Mere Petrus nreher pa niwra , A ' g edonna !
One of the servants of the high priest , being a relative of him whose ear Peter had cut off , said , Did n't I see you in the garden with him ? ||| Noma makla ' hopopna-lili'iru id la imam-imam o'ta lawanni de nmai lia Petrus . De e hyalli de ed maka Petrusa ha ndawar doin tlinni walli malganna , pede nakot la Petrus niwra , A ' g e umkek walia omuor Yesus la ' a nhyi ' de maka mel de miy e miwok tar lia de , pa yana mriehera .
Peter therefore denied it again , and immediately the rooster crowed . ||| Mere Petrus nrehera owa'an pa niwra , Edonna ! Dewade plinu-plinnianamde hiwi lallu nkukule'ewa .
They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the Praetorium . It was early , and they themselves did n't enter into the Praetorium , that they might not be defiled , but might eat the Passover . ||| La'pa yawyawar ma'ta de , makden Yahudi rodia Yesus rwatiaga Kayafas genni pa rokria gubernur hairi Roma genni . Riy Yahudi nek de edonna rparan pia rler la gubernura genni de . Yanhi'pa hota rla ' hande de rlernana maka rmakriarnia , yoma Yahudi agamni deullu-tatarni emkade . Yoma la'pa rlernan maka rmakriarnia dewade hota ta'en niana rla ' pa ra'an la mei Paska .
Pilate therefore went out to them and said , What accusation do you bring against this man ? ||| La ' hade pede Pilatus nlergot pa nla natiana re niwra , Hota hya ' hala maka miy ma mtio'ona riy dina de ?
They answered him , If this man were n't an evildoer , we would n't have delivered him up to you . ||| Noma honona riarin tar pua riwra , Hade edonna Nhal mana ami edonna mga ' pua amodi E la pap gubernura .
Pilate therefore said to them , Take him yourselves , and judge him according to your law . Therefore the Jews said to him , It is illegal for us to put anyone to death , ||| Noma Pilatus nakot la niwra , Mieh ' a mia'ala , pa mietlia do'oni-halli , de mliernohora miy orgahami deulu-tatarmi . Mere Yahudi re riwra , Hota ami edonna modi plolli pa mukum penna rimormiori .
that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled , which he spoke , signifying by what kind of death he should die . ||| Rakot emkade totpena hya ' ed maka Yesus Nakot oleka la ' a E matmiatni yala'ani hota naplola .
Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium , called Jesus , and said to him , Are you the King of the Jews ? ||| Dewade Pilatus nawal lia rialam pa npolga Yesus pa natiana niwra , Plola O ' di de ray Yahudi id O ' a ?
Jesus answered him , Do you say this by yourself , or did others tell you about me ? ||| Noma Yesus Nwalolla Niwra , Hadi de o tianmu hadina ? Onde yanpa riy rod niur tiy o ' pa mutian A ' u ?
Pilate answered , I 'm not a Jew , am I ? Your own nation and the chief priests delivered you to me . What have you done ? ||| Noma Pilatus nakot la , Mmueh ' a mumkeka a ' de riy Yahudi id a ' u ? ! Mak kodi O'ola mai a ' u , de O rimormiormu owa'an rora imam o'tani-matni re . Hya ' ed mak Mhi ' a pede emkadina ?
Jesus answered , My Kingdom is not of this world . If my Kingdom were of this world , then my servants would fight , that I would n't be delivered to the Jews . But now my Kingdom is not from here . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , A plo'lu-mneh ' u maka A hai'ru nlowlia de edonna nwatiawu noh di wawannu , yoma la'pa A hai'ru nwatiawu nohkeran di , A li'mu-ro'ru re hota rwadupla-rwahya'ala pa rma rod nian A ' u totpena yana riy rod A lia o'ta-mata Yahudi . Mere plola A hai'ru de edonna nwatiawua noh di wawannu .
Pilate therefore said to him , Are you a king then ? Jesus answered , You say that I am a king . For this reason I have been born , and for this reason I have come into the world , that I should testify to the truth . Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice . ||| Noma Pilatus natian owa'an niwra , Emkade de , O ' di de ray id O ' a ? Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , O e mukota de ray id A ' u , ne lirmu de naplola . Rmori A pua diella nohkeran di totpena Aghi ' a Ray . De A maimia'yu di la ' nohkeran di wawannu de totpena A'ukot nohor rer tio ' a hya ' ed mak kaplola . Ne riy honona mak kwahaka hya ' ed mak kaplola , de er maka katlina-katailla mai A ' u .
Pilate said to him , What is truth ? When he had said this , he went out again to the Jews , and said to them , I find no basis for a charge against him . ||| Noma Pilatus natian nohor la ' a lir de niwra , Ha ? Mere emkameni pa itat niohora hya ' ed mak kaplola ? Noma Pilatus nlergot owa'an pa nakot la Yahudi re niwra , A ' g edonna liernana riy di halli !
But you have a custom that I should release someone to you at the Passover . Therefore , do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews ? ||| La'pa lernana lerlalawna Paska , de nhi'inde Agolin doinia riy id la roma nhio'la tiy miy . Pede dodo'ondi de miy mpiayow pa agolin doinia Ray Yahudi di tiy miy ?
Then they all shouted again , saying , Not this man , but Barabbas ! Now Barabbas was a robber . ||| Dewade honona riarin pa riwra , Yana ! Yan muolin hadella , muolin neka Barabas ! Barabas di de riy id mak kmalawan la hairi Roma .
So Pilate then took Jesus and flogged him . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Pilatus nhopan pa makodi keki-rautu re rliwra-rkaklia Yesus .
The soldiers twisted thorns into a crown and put it on his head , and dressed him in a purple garment . ||| Noma makodi keki-rautu re rhi ' a wutu-lai ida de rnairi pu'na-kiarit ruri pa rkow nana la Yesus o'tani , nhor nia'nama rohoga emeka ray-ray naniair plalahwani mak ungu pa Nnairia .
They kept saying , Hail , King of the Jews ! and they kept slapping him . ||| Riy rla ' a-rmai lia Yesus gaini ralamni na'nama rakot la riwra , Mmuormiori plalahwa Ray Yahu'du ne ! Nhorwua demade rpahara klili-kdioria .
Then Pilate went out again , and said to them , Behold , I bring him out to you , that you may know that I find no basis for a charge against him . ||| Nhor nioma Pilatus nlergot owa'an pa nakot la riy mutlialawna re niwra , Mimkek memna agodia hadi tiy miy totpena miat muemna , de a ' g edon liernana riy di halli .
Jesus therefore came out , wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment . Pilate said to them , Behold , the man ! ||| Noma Yesus Nlergot de Nnairia wutu-lai rururi-karkiarti me Nnairia naniairi plalahwa hor ungu . Na'nama Pilatus nakot la re niwra , Mimkek la riy dee !
When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him , they shouted , saying , Crucify ! Crucify ! Pilate said to them , Take him yourselves and crucify him , for I find no basis for a charge against him . ||| La'pa imam re o'tani-matni rora mak katiak reri Uplerlawna roma kreini re ramkeka Yesus noma rhaun pa riwra , Mlia mpuairia la auwlakra , mlia mpuairia la auwlakra ! Mere Pilatus niwra , Mia'ala pa orgahami mlia mpiairia la auwlakra hananni , yoma a ' g edonna liernan riy di halli kuku ' eti .
The Jews answered him , We have a law , and by our law he ought to die , because he made himself the Son of God . ||| Riy Yahudi re rwahla Pilatus lirni riwra , La ' a a deulu-tatar mamni de riy mak emkare de rukum penan memna , yoma Eniwra E de Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a .
When therefore Pilate heard this saying , he was more afraid . ||| La'pa Pilatus natlin nan rakot emkare , noma Pilatus yeher to'ama namta'ata .
He entered into the Praetorium again , and said to Jesus , Where are you from ? But Jesus gave him no answer . ||| Noma nler owa'an la rialma , ne la'pa rodia Yesus pa rler la rialma , noma Pilatus natiana niwra , O ' di de makden meni id O ' a ? Mere Yesus lir ta ' a-waw ta ' to'owa .
Pilate therefore said to him , Are n't you speaking to me ? Do n't you know that I have power to release you and have power to crucify you ? ||| Pede Pilatus natian owa'ana , O ' edonna Multier mai a ' u ? Totpa Muatgo , a ' g ed mak kodi plolli pa agolin doin O'ola la ' lira tunmu wawannu me a ' niekpa kodi plolli pa wuairi O ' la ' auwlakra .
Jesus answered , You would have no power at all against me , unless it were given to you from above . Therefore he who delivered me to you has greater sin . ||| Noma Yesus Nakota la Niwra , La'pa Uplerlawna edonna Nala plola tiy o ' pa omukmua A ' u , de o ' edonna muodi plolli mai A ' u . Pede la'pa riy mak kal A lia o ' a pa mukmua A ' u , de hota e do'oni-halli narehi-nalawan tiy o ' a .
At this , Pilate was seeking to release him , but the Jews cried out , saying , If you release this man , you are n't Caesar 's friend ! Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar ! ||| La'pa Pilatus natlin nan maka Ha Nakota re , dewade nahak talan totpena na nolin doin Yesus , mere riy Yahudi re rhaunu-rhaun pa riwra , La'pa tuna nod nian hade , de tuna edon nkar wiut lia Kaisar , hairi Roma rayni de ! Riy maka kwet inonni la ray , de hota e ' ed maka kora ray Kaisar kwahapra lia'ara .
When Pilate therefore heard these words , he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called The Pavement , but in Hebrew , Gabbatha . ||| La'pa Pilatus natlin nan lira re , dewade nodgiota Yesus la pliorni dewade Pilatus namtatan la liwangeni nhiudi-pniara , la ' a gen miaka ra'atria watu , maka ha rweta la yawala Ibrani de riwra Gabata .
Now it was the Preparation Day of the Passover , at about the sixth hour . He said to the Jews , Behold , your King ! ||| La ' ler de nhi ' pa lera nwawuau ro'onni , la ' ler maka ha rwahi ' a-rwayod tiarga pa rwei repar de , de la ' a Sabat lerni maka ktuin tiaru lia lerlalawna Paska . Nhor nioka Pilatus nakota la ' a riy mak kden la hande niwra , Miy raymi inhatti !
They cried out , Away with him ! Away with him ! Crucify him ! Pilate said to them , Shall I crucify your King ? The chief priests answered , We have no king but Caesar ! ||| Mere rhaunu-rhaun pa riwra , Mpienna ! Mpienna ! Mlia mpiair wenna la auwlakra hananni ! Noma Pilatus natiana re niwra , Hota a ' g ed mak kla kwair wenna miy raymi la auwlakra hananni ? Noma imam re o'tani-matni re riwra , Eneknek to'ama amatg de a ray miamni de ray Kaisar !
So then he delivered him to them to be crucified . So they took Jesus and led him away . ||| Dewade Pilatus nala Yesus la ira , totpena rla rwairia Yesus la auwlakar hananni . Noma ra'ala Yesus pa rodi rla'awa .
He went out , bearing his cross , to the place called The Place of a Skull , which is called in Hebrew , Golgotha , ||| Rla ' de Yesus orgahani Nmeh ' a Nakwar nana auwlakarni pa Nokria gen miak ha rweta la Riy Ruri-Kliaklu Genni , maka la yawala Ibrani de rweta la Golgota .
where they crucified him , and with him two others , on either side one , and Jesus in the middle . ||| Hota la ' gen die nanpena rla rwairia Yesus la auwlakra hananni . Ne rwair taru wuali riy wor lia auwlakra hananni , id la malganna , id la malwiru ne Yesus Nden la letgara .
Pilate wrote a title also , and put it on the cross . There was written , JESUS OF NAZARETH , THE KING OF THE JEWS . ||| Pilatus nhopan pa rhorat targa la auganna ida , de riwra , Hadi de Yesus , riy Nasaret , Yahudi Rayni inhatti . Nhor diewade rpasna la Yesus auwlakarni .
Therefore many of the Jews read this title , for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city , and it was written in Hebrew , in Latin , and in Greek . ||| Riy Yahudi harahu rpaikia maka ha rhorat tar die . Yoma gen miaka ha rkenia Yesus auwlakarni de edonna olieta la letlawna onni . Ne mak ha rhorta re de rnairia yawala Ibrani , yawala Latin me yawala Yunani .
The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate , Do n't write , ‘ The King of the Jews , ' but , ‘ he said , I am King of the Jews . ' ||| Noma imam re o'tani-matni re rakot la Pilatus riwra , Yana mhuorta emkade . Mere mhuorat neka miwra , Riy di Niwra A ' di de Yahudi Rayni A ' u .
Pilate answered , What I have written , I have written . ||| Mere Pilatus nakot la niwra , Maka ghorat taru de yana riy rhap dioinia la . Ndella pa hota emkade nek wa !
Then the soldiers , when they had crucified Jesus , took his garments and made four parts , to every soldier a part , and also the tunic . Now the tunic was without seam , woven from the top throughout . ||| La'pa makodi keki-rautu re rkenia Yesus la ' auwlakra , dewade ra'ala Yesus naniayarni pa rhakra la nhiakra wogata totpena rima-rima gahani . Ira ra ' wal lia koka plalahwani , mak emeka nhiekru yoma edonna rhor nana .
Then they said to one another , Let 's not tear it , but cast lots for it to decide whose it will be , that the Scripture might be fulfilled , which says , They parted my garments among them . They cast lots for my clothing . Therefore the soldiers did these things . ||| Noma makodi keki-rautu re idma nakot la ida riwra , Yana iteti-tlaiya raini plalahwa di . Mai pia tsedu patui niohora totpena he ' ed maka klernana . La ' hade de totpa hota ntu'tu la Puka lirni niwra , Hota ir er maka khakre'era A naniai'ru , ne rhed patui la A rainu . Pede makodi keki-rautu re rhi ' emkade .
But standing by Jesus ' cross were his mother , his mother 's sister , Mary the wife of Clopas , and Mary Magdalene . ||| La'pa rhi ' hare de Yesus inni nor walia elli , me Maria , Eklopsa patke'eni , me Maria Magdalena e rtutrieri la ' a auwlakra onni .
Therefore when Jesus saw his mother , and the disciple whom he loved standing there , he said to his mother , Woman , behold , your son ! ||| La'pa Yesus matni nki'ir nana riy id maklernohor reri E ' a maka Ensaynia de nora Yesus inni rtutrier lia ' hande noma Yesus Npol lia inni niwra , Ina , hota a'namu eda di !
Then he said to the disciple , Behold , your mother ! From that hour , the disciple took her to his own home . ||| Nhor nioma Yesus nakot la riy de niwra , Hyalia , hota o inmu hade . La ' dodo'on de meman pa riy de na'ala Yesus inni pa nora rhol wiutu .
After this , Jesus , seeing that all things were now finished , that the Scripture might be fulfilled , said , I am thirsty ! ||| Yesus Natga de hare honona maka Uplerlawna Nhopna Enhi ' de Enhi ' pa nhorwua la dodo'ondi wa , ne totpena hya ' maka Puka ralamni ha nakot taru re de honona ntutu-nte'ewa , pede Niwra , Atie'ru kerna .
Now a vessel full of vinegar was set there , so they put a sponge full of the vinegar on hyssop , and held it at his mouth . ||| La hande de lari ida npenpuen lia anggur turu mak milmilu , noma ra'ala kuliai id na'nama rto ' a la anggur tur milmil die na'nama rhoinia la ora id maka ha rweta la hisop pa rtapla la Yesus nurnu .
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar , he said , It is finished ! Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit . ||| Noma Yesus Ndihmia anggur tur milmil die nhor nioma Nhar lirni Niwra , A tulla-knia'ru ntutu-nte ' olek wa . Dewade Yesus o'tani nariu ' u wua ne Nwaran doin aranni .
Therefore the Jews , because it was the Preparation Day , so that the bodies would n't remain on the cross on the Sabbath for that Sabbath was a special one , asked of Pilate that their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away . ||| La ' ler de , de reparni de la ' Sabat lerni . Ne rerehnian de Sabat de ho'mana ntuin taru lia ' a Yahudi lerlalawanni Paska . Mak kodi plolli la riy Yahudi re rahmen pa mak kmat lia auwlakra hananni re rawniair nek la auwlakra hananni la ' a Sabat lerni maka ha rwei-rnara . La ' hade pede riy Yahudi rwak la Pilatus totpena nwayow pa rtewar watwiat riy mak kden la auwlakra lakni totpena plet pa rmati nanpena ralernia .
Therefore the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and of the other who was crucified with him , ||| Pede makodi keki-rautu re rla ' pa rtewar wat ulga riy maroro ' a maka kletgar reria Yesus re , lakni .
but when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead , they did n't break his legs . ||| Mere la'pa rwakriania Yesus , pa riwra rtewar lakni , mere rla ' de ramkek de Nmati olekwa , de edonna rtewar Yesus lakni .
However , one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear , and immediately blood and water came out . ||| Mere makodi keki-rautu id de nho'ora welhara la Yesus ruh'anu nayanni pa rara nawniah ' a wutu gera nwau gota .
He who has seen has testified , and his testimony is true . He knows that he tells the truth , that you may believe . ||| Mimpiesiaya , a ' g ed mak kamkek memna hihi ' a-yapyap die , me orgah ' u ed mak kakot nohora lir mak kaplol di . Agatga mak a'ukota re de plola , ne a'ukot nohora hadi totpa la ' miy miana mpiesiaya de .
For these things happened that the Scripture might be fulfilled , A bone of him will not be broken . ||| Makodi keki-rautu re edon rtewar wat Yesus lakni totpena hya ' maka ha rakota la Puka ralamni de ntutu-nte'ewa . Yoma la ' Puka ralamni de niwra , Hota la'pa rurni-kliakallu id mana edonna rtewar wati .
Again another Scripture says , They will look on him whom they pierced . ||| La Puka ralamni mana rhorat targa de riwra , Hota riy ramkek nan memn E ' a maka ha rkoki-rgaur nana .
After these things , Joseph of Arimathaea , being a disciple of Jesus , but secretly for fear of the Jews , asked of Pilate that he might take away Jesus ' body . Pilate gave him permission . He came therefore and took away his body . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yusup mak kwatiawua Arimatea nma nwak la Pilatus pa nadera Yesus inonni la e tiamin matgenni . Yusup di de maklernohor reria Yesus ida de , mere edon nakot nohor e pesiayni pa riy ratlin nana yoma namta'at reria Yahudi o'tani-matni . Noma Pilatus nwayow nohora , pa Yusup nla nala Yesus inonni mak kmati olek de pa nadera la ' a liena ralamni .
Nicodemus , who at first came to Jesus by night , also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes , about a hundred Roman pounds . ||| La ' noma Nikodemus mak kmai Yesus la ' mela id la ' a mahnek meman de , nor rewre'wa Yusup talla . De la ' ler de Nikodemus e nodia wu'ru mikmikri oke ' a nor wutga ha'aki ayalli oke ' a me ortawi-autiawi maka huwnu mikmikri pa rnairia ra rawu'ru-ragania rohala Yesus inonni . Hare weratni edonna nhal de kilu terampwotelu .
So they took Jesus ' body , and bound it in linen cloths with the spices , as the custom of the Jews is to bury . ||| Noma irrora ra'ala Yesus inonni de na'nama rala kok lawna mnurnuhru kafan ra rtoman wutga la wu'ru mak kahuwu mikmikri re pa rtot nohora Yahudi nhi'inde ha rhi ' a la mati-molu .
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden . In the garden was a new tomb in which no man had ever yet been laid . ||| Edon olieta la ' a gen miaka ha rkenia Yesus auwlakarni de , de nhyi ' id geni hade . La lutur-le ' die ralamni , de lien mak edonna rken mia'ta mati-molu etla hande .
Then , because of the Jews ' Preparation Day for the tomb was near at hand , they laid Jesus there . ||| Yoma la ler de , ler maka rwahi ' targa hare honona pa rwei-rnara Sabat lerni ler maka Yahudi edon rkar lia , la ' hade pede rla ' rkenia Yesus inonni della hande , yoma lien de rehgorgoru .
Now on the first day of the week , Mary Magdalene went early , while it was still dark , to the tomb , and saw that the stone had been taken away from the tomb . ||| La'pa yawyawar ma'ta la krei lerni , dewade Maria Magdalena nokria lien maka ha rkenia Yesus inonni . Nla ' noma namkek de wat liawan maka ha ra rherit targa hoi die nhiarni ema rwaklol dioinia la walli .
Therefore she ran and came to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved , and said to them , They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb , and we do n't know where they have laid him ! ||| Pede nawlar pia nla nahaka Simon Petrus me maklernohor reri Yesus id to ' a , maka Yesus Nsayni . Noma Maria Magdalena npol lia re niwra , Eee ! Riy ra ' olek la Itmatromni inonni . Ne amaplin niohora etla meni ee !
Therefore Peter and the other disciple went out , and they went toward the tomb . ||| Pede Petrus nora mutwualli de la pa ramkeka la hoi die ralamni .
They both ran together . The other disciple outran Peter and came to the tomb first . ||| Irrora rawlari mere Petrus mutwualli nala ' ulga Petrus la hoi-kietar de .
Stooping and looking in , he saw the linen cloths lying there , yet he did n't enter in . ||| Mutwualli de nla ' noka nru ' pua namkek la lien de , de namkek nan to ' a kok lawna wawahra nayadera mere e edonna nler la rialma .
Then Simon Peter came , following him , and entered into the tomb . He saw the linen cloths lying , ||| Simon Petrus ntawli'ir pa nlernohora , noma nodi liarni la lien de ralamni . La ' noma namkek nana kok lawan de nayadera .
and the cloth that had been on his head , not lying with the linen cloths , but rolled up in a place by itself . ||| Mere namkek nana kokanan maka ra rwatiehra Yesus o'tani edonna nden wut lia ' kok lawan de , mere napniopan la geni id to ' a .
So then the other disciple who came first to the tomb also entered in , and he saw and believed . ||| Nhor nioma Petrus mutwualli mak kala ' ul die , nler walia lien de ralamni . La'pa namkek nan tutga , na'nama npesiaya de Yesus Nmori owa'ana .
For as yet they did n't know the Scripture , that he must rise from the dead . ||| Yoma la ' pa emkameni ho'mana la ' Puka ralamni de ha rakot targa de hota Yesus Nmori owa'an la matmiati ralamni , de la'pa la ' lera-mela ri ho'mana maklernohor reri Yesus re edonna rna'erit nan ma'ta lir de nnia'eratni .
So the disciples went away again to their own homes . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma irrora rla'awa ir romni .
But Mary was standing outside at the tomb weeping . So as she wept , she stooped and looked into the tomb , ||| Mere Maria Magdalena ntutrier niek la liena onni pa nahe ' i kniakru . La'pa nkakakur reri de nru ' pua natot la lien de ralamni .
and she saw two angels in white sitting , one at the head and one at the feet , where the body of Jesus had lain . ||| Noma namkek nana Uplerlawna hopopanni woru rlipa-rka'ma nohora naniayarni pa ramtatan la gen miaka rkenia Yesus inonni la . Rrora ramtatna de ida nden la gen die o'tani me ida nden la lakni .
They asked her , Woman , why are you weeping ? She said to them , Because they have taken away my Lord , and I do n't know where they have laid him . ||| Noma hopopna re ratiana riwra , Hya ' a nariei pia omkakru ine ? Noma Maria nakot la niwra , Ra ' oleka a Matro'mu inonni , pede a ' g e uhaka .
When she had said this , she turned around and saw Jesus standing , and did n't know that it was Jesus . ||| La'pa nakot emkade dewade namkek la to'orni de Yesus e Ntutrieri , mere naplinga de Yesus inhatta .
Jesus said to her , Woman , why are you weeping ? Who are you looking for ? She , supposing him to be the gardener , said to him , Sir , if you have carried him away , tell me where you have laid him , and I will take him away . ||| Noma Yesus Natiana Niwra , Nihya'pa omkakru ine ? Ne omuhaka he ' a ? Mere Maria nhoi hade la ora nhyi ' de pede nakot la , Ame , yanpa o ' e mpuatitnia Ha genni mai handi , de mtiulan pa mukot mai a ' u totpena a lia gala .
Jesus said to her , Mary . She turned and said to him , Rabboni ! which is to say , Teacher ! ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Maria ! Noma Maria napal lia Yesus pa niwra , Rabuni ! de nnairia yawala Ibrani nnia'eratni de tungkurga .
Jesus said to her , Do n't hold me , for I have n't yet ascended to my Father , but go to my brothers and tell them , ‘ I am ascending to my Father and your Father , to my God and your God . ' ||| Mere Yesus Niwra , Yana mtieman la A ' u ina , yoma A ' g edonna gha'at ma't la heyanan la ' A'mu de . Mere mlia ' pa mukota la A A'mu-hya'lu rora A i'nu-na'ru , muiwra A ' g e giwra gha'at la heyanan pa lia A'mu mak miy Ammi wali die , me A Uplerlawnu , me miy Uplerlawanmi wal die .
Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord , and that he had said these things to her . ||| Dewade Maria nla ' pa nod kiota la maklernohor reria Yesus re niwra , Ee ! A ma'tu mak kamkek memna Yesus ! Dewade nakot nohora Itmatromlawanni Yesus nnio'oni la ira .
When therefore it was evening on that day , the first day of the week , and when the doors were locked where the disciples were assembled , for fear of the Jews , Jesus came and stood in the middle and said to them , Peace be to you . ||| La'pa krei lerni de la'pa nmel wa , dewade maklernohor reri Yesus re rawok la roma ida , ne rkahro'pa targa nhiari re honona , yoma ramta'at rer lia Yahudi re o'tani-matni . Dewade plinu-plinnianama Yesus Ntutrier lia ira letgara-mneneheni na'nama Nwak kalwieda la ir honona Niwra , Awuak pa Uplerlawna Nala kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy !
When he had said this , he showed them his hands and his side . The disciples therefore were glad when they saw the Lord . ||| La'pa Nakot emkade dewade Ntutga lo'mani ralamni me ruh'anu nayanni la ira . La'pa ramkek nana Itmatromni de , dewade ralamni rahepuepur nohora .
Jesus therefore said to them again , Peace be to you . As the Father has sent me , even so I send you . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot owa'ana lira ralamni la ira Niwra , Mdien la kalwiedni-paitiotni . Emeknekama A'mu Nhopn A ' u , de emkade wal lia Aghopan miy .
When he had said this , he breathed on them , and said to them , Receive the Holy Spirit ! ||| Dewade Neu tiarga aranni la ira , ne Nakot la Niwra , Mrieiniana Uplerlawna Nhiwni de .
If you forgive anyone 's sins , they have been forgiven them . If you retain anyone 's sins , they have been retained . ||| La'pa mikot la rira pa rhoitio'or doinia ir do'oni-halli . La'pa ir edon ratlin la lirmi re , pa narieiniande miy mtio'on rer mia't ir la do'oni-halli , de hota Uplerlawna mana edonna Namou-nawitna ir do'oni-halli . Mere la'pa ir ratlin la miy lirmi pa rto'or doinia ir do'oni-halli , narieiniande miy edon mtio'on rer owa'ana ir do'oni-halli , ne hota Uplerlawna mana Namou-nawitna ir do'oni-halli re .
But Thomas , one of the twelve , called Didymus , was n't with them when Jesus came . ||| Tomsa , maka ha rweta la A'na Dio ' a e ' mana riy id wal lia riy termida wehrani woru maklernohor reria Yesus . La ' lera Yesus Nayamkek la e mutwualli re , de Tomsa edonna nden wut lia ira .
The other disciples therefore said to him , We have seen the Lord ! But he said to them , Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails , put my finger into the print of the nails , and put my hand into his side , I will not believe . ||| Pede maklernohor reria Yesus korni re rakot la Tomsa riwra , Tomsa , Amamkek oleka Itmatromni ! Mere Tomsa nakot la re niwra , La'pa a ' g edonna gala ma'tu umkek nana lo'mani maka ha rroh nan de , me la walia ruh'anu nayanni mak ha rho'or nana me a ' g edonna gal ma'ta a li'mu di ga ghai niana , de a ' g edonna puesiaya !
After eight days , again his disciples were inside and Thomas was with them . Jesus came , the doors being locked , and stood in the middle , and said , Peace be to you . ||| La'pa krei ida nto'or doin la , dewade maklernohor reri re e rawok owa'an la gen die ne Tomsa mana ed wal lia , ne nhiari re honona de rkahro'pa tar momuoga . Mere plinu-plinnianama Yesus Ntutrier lia letgara-mneneh na'nama Niwra , Upa-a'na miy re , mdien rer lia kalwieda-paitiota !
Then he said to Thomas , Reach here your finger , and see my hands . Reach here your hand , and put it into my side . Do n't be unbelieving , but believing . ||| Nhor nia'nama Yesus Nakot la Tomsa Niwra , Tomsa , mumkek la A lo'mu ralamni , ne mtieman rer lia . Ne mrian limmu pa mhuai lia A ruh ' u nayanni mak kamno ' di . Yan ralammu worworga mere mpuesiaya , de A ' g inhatti .
Thomas answered him , My Lord and my God ! ||| Dewade Tomsa nhar lirni pa nakot la Yesus niwra , Matromlawnu nee ! Uplerlawnu nee !
Jesus said to him , Because you have seen me , you have believed . Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Ompuesiaya , yoma mumkek memna A ' u toh ! Mere la'pa riy mak edon kamkeka mere natlin nan ne npesiaya de hota riy de nlernana pripanni-fa'anni la Uplerlawna .
Therefore Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples , which are not written in this book , ||| Yesus Nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini dom to ' wali la ' a maklernohor reria re gaini ralamni , mere edonna rhorta la Puk di yoma harahu rehia .
but these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ , the Son of God , and that believing you may have life in his name . ||| Mere honona re maka e rhorat targa ri de totpena miy mpiesiaya , la ' a Yesus de Ray Makamori-Kalewna inhatta ! Uplerlawna A'nani hade , ne la ' a mpiesiaya de pede mlier la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa .
After these things , Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias . He revealed himself this way . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Yesus Ntutg owa'an rupni ralamni owa'an la maklernohor reri E ' a re la ' a danau Tiberias . Emkadilla wniahaurnu .
Simon Peter , Thomas called Didymus , Nathanael of Cana in Galilee , and the sons of Zebedee , and two others of his disciples were together . ||| La ' ler ida , la'pa Simon Petrus , Tomsa , a'na dio ' de , Nataniel mak kwatiawu leta Kana la Galilea , Sebedeus upni-a'nani rora re , ror wutga riy woru maklernohor reria Yesus dom wal pia e rawok taru .
Simon Peter said to them , I 'm going fishing . They told him , We are also coming with you . They immediately went out and entered into the boat . That night , they caught nothing . ||| Dewade Simon Petrus nakot la talanwalli re niwra , Agiwra lia ' lora . Noma mutwualli re rakot la riwra , Hade emkade , de amor wali . Noma rodi puou pa rla'awa . Mere la ' mel lawan de , edonna rlernan etia i'na ida .
But when day had already come , Jesus stood on the beach , yet the disciples did n't know that it was Jesus . ||| La'pa lera nhi ' pa matni npah ' a wa , dewade ramkek de Yesus e Ntutrieri lia eni wawannu , mere edonna rakniau niana .
Jesus therefore said to them , Children , have you anything to eat ? They answered him , No . ||| Noma Yesus Nhaun la re Niwra , Hyal miy re ! Miy e mliernan i'na me edonna ? Noma rwalolla riwra , Makleh eni , Tuna .
He said to them , Cast the net on the right side of the boat , and you will find some . They cast it therefore , and now they were n't able to draw it in for the multitude of fish . ||| Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Demade mietar darmi la puoumi walli malganna totpena mliernan i'na . Noma hare retar dar della puou walli malganna , dewade takeni rwahed niana dar die , yoma i'na npenpuen lia ralamni .
That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter , It 's the Lord ! So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord , he wrapped his coat around himself for he was naked , and threw himself into the sea . ||| Noma riy id la maka Yesus ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re maka Nsayn rehia de , nakot la Petrus niwra , Mimkek to'ola , Itmatromlawanni hade ! La'pa Simon Petrus natlin nan mutwualli de lirni de dewade nhu'ru la rayanni , yoma edonna narain ma'ta , dewade nehgerun la tah ' i .
But the other disciples came in the little boat for they were not far from the land , but about two hundred cubits away , dragging the net full of fish . ||| Ne maklernohor reri re korni , rodi puou rlernohora la keranni ne rwahedged liola dar miaka kpenpuen lia i'na re , yoma ir edonna olieta la keranni , la'pa edonna ghal de olietni la keranni de re ' a terampwonem rehenu 100 meter .
So when they got out on the land , they saw a fire of coals there , with fish and bread laid on it . ||| La'pa rerun la puou , pa rla'awa keranni de ramkek de i'na id ed olek la ai kwiari ralamni me roti mana er olek wal lia hande .
Jesus said to them , Bring some of the fish which you have just caught . ||| Noma Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Miod tieka i'n mak na'nama mliernana re dom la handi .
Simon Peter went up , and drew the net to land , full of one hundred fifty-three great fish . Even though there were so many , the net was n't torn . ||| Dewade Simon Petrus nha'at la puou , na'nama nhedga darni la keranni de enni i'na rahu ida terampwolima wehrani wotelu de i'n lawan mamaini . Ne la'pa i'n rahu emkade ho'mana dar die edonna napriti .
Jesus said to them , Come and eat breakfast ! None of the disciples dared inquire of him , Who are you ? knowing that it was the Lord . ||| Dewade Yesus Nakot la re Niwra , Mai pia ta'ana ! Mere maklernohor rer riy id mana edonna nparan pia natiana la Am de he ' a ? Yoma ratga de Orgahi-Orha ' a inhatta .
Then Jesus came and took the bread , gave it to them , and the fish likewise . ||| Noma Yesus Nwakriania re na'nama Na'ala roti re pa Nalla ' ira . Na ' walia i'na re pa Nalla re .
This is now the third time that Jesus was revealed to his disciples after he had risen from the dead . ||| La ' ler di Yesus Nayamkek nana re'eni wotellu la ' a maklernohor reri E ' a re , la ' ler maka Enmori owa'an la matmiati ralamni .
So when they had eaten their breakfast , Jesus said to Simon Peter , Simon , son of Jonah , do you love me more than these ? He said to him , Yes , Lord , you know that I have affection for you . He said to him , Feed my lambs . ||| La'pa ra'an pa nhorwua , noma Yesus Nakot la Simon Petrus Niwra , Simona , Yohansi A'nani ne , hota o e msiayn rehi A lia hari honona ? Noma Petrus nakot la niwra , Matroma , orgahamu Muatga de asiaynia Matro'mu . Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Had emkade de muodia A du'mu ree !
He said to him again a second time , Simon , son of Jonah , do you love me ? He said to him , Yes , Lord , you know that I have affection for you . He said to him , Tend my sheep . ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot owa'an la re'eni wornu de Niwra , Simona Yohansi a'nani ne , plol toto'pa o e msiayni A ' u ? Noma Petrus nakot la niwra , Plola Matroma , Matro'mu Natga de a ' g e siayni O ' a Matroma . Noma Yesus Niwra , Muodia A du'mu re .
He said to him the third time , Simon , son of Jonah , do you have affection for me ? Peter was grieved because he asked him the third time , Do you have affection for me ? He said to him , Lord , you know everything . You know that I have affection for you . Jesus said to him , Feed my sheep . ||| Yesus yatianni re'eni wotellu Niwra , Simona Yohansi a'nani nee ! Plol o ' e msiayni A ' u ? Dewade Petrus ralamni nmayo ' a yoma tiana re'eni wotel muemn olekwa . Noma Petrus nwalol owa'an la niwra , Matroma , Matro'mu Natg oleka haneknek wawannu . Matro'mu Natga de a ralmu e nod rer lia Matro'mu . Noma Yesus Nakot la Niwra , Demade , mhilpai-muanatga A du'mu re .
Most certainly I tell you , when you were young , you dressed yourself and walked where you wanted to . But when you are old , you will stretch out your hands , and another will dress you and carry you where you do n't want to go . Now he said this , signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God . When he had said this , he said to him , Follow me . ||| Noma Yesus Nnairia lira pa na Ntutga hota Petrus matmiatni ha lolola totpena nodia ya'uli-yawed lia Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , Niwra , Hota plola la ' A li'ru-tu'nu ri ! La ' lera omhuatriapriap mia'ta , de o orgahamu omhi ' a hya ' to ' a , de nden nek la o ralma-riormu . Mere hota la'pa omhuamto'owa de hota omtiania o limmu pa rwutga ne rodi o ' pa rlola meni-meni mak omuhmena mliola . Mere la kropna-krieutu , wniunu-wnienna hya ' ho'mana mdien rer lia pesiaymu pa mliernohora A ' u .
Then Peter , turning around , saw a disciple following . This was the disciple whom Jesus loved , the one who had also leaned on Jesus ' chest at the supper and asked , Lord , who is going to betray you ? ||| La'pa Petrus nkillia to'orni de namkek nana riy id la maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re maka Yesus Nsaynia de e nlernohor reri ira . Riy de ed maka la ' ler dello , e namtatan la Yesus onni pa ra'an wutu Paska ne natian Yesus niwra , Matroma hota he ' ed mak kwaldioin pa ka'olga O ' a ?
Peter , seeing him , said to Jesus , Lord , what about this man ? ||| La'pa dodo'ondi de Petrus namkek la riy de noma Petrus natiana Yesus niwra , Matroma emkameni la hadena ?
Jesus said to him , If I desire that he stay until I come , what is that to you ? You follow me . ||| Noma Yesus Niwra , Omliernohora nek A ' wua . Yana mpiaror nohora A ralma-rio'ru la mutwualmu . La'pa Awuaror pa hota enmormior niekpa nwei pia A'uwali owa'an pa Amuai , la ' hade de yana ralma-riormu nla ' nana de !
This saying therefore went out among the brothers that this disciple would n't die . Yet Jesus did n't say to him that he would n't die , but , If I desire that he stay until I come , what is that to you ? ||| Dewade lira la ' lira la ' a maklernohor reri Yesus re riwra , ir mutwualli de hota edonna nmati . Mere Yesus edon Nakot Niwra , Hota mutwualmu de hota edon nmati . Eneknek to ' a Niwra , La'pa la ' nan A ralma-rio'ru de e nmormior niekpa nwei pia A'uwal pia Amuai , yana wniarormu nla ' nan hade .
This is the disciple who testifies about these things , and wrote these things . We know that his witness is true . ||| Ne a ' di de maklernohor reri Yesus maka rwarora hota edon nmati . A ' g ed mak kakot nohora hya ' maka Yesus Nhi ' a-nyapi ri honona . Ne a ' g ed mak khorta hare honona la ' Puka di ralamni . Ne itatga la ' a hya ' maka a'ukota de ha naplola .
There are also many other things which Jesus did , which if they would all be written , I suppose that even the world itself would n't have room for the books that would be written . ||| Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni harahu ma'ta pede la'pa rhorat targa hare honona la puka re , de awuarora de geni-tiena la nohkeran di wawannu edonna rtu'tu pa rwahi ' targa puka re .
The first book I wrote , Theophilus , concerned all that Jesus began both to do and to teach , ||| Hya'lu Topilsu . La ' a puka yanulnulu de , aghorat targ oleka , hya ' a-hya ' a mak Yesus Nhi ' oleka me Nwatutg oleka la ' a lerni la Enariri kniarni
until the day in which he was received up , after he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen . ||| la'pa ntutu-nte ' wal lia ler maka Narian pa Nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mere edon Narian ma'ta la heyanan de , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la Yesus pa Nano ' a-na'atga makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni mak Nwalir niana .
To these he also showed himself alive after he suffered , by many proofs , appearing to them over a period of forty days and speaking about God 's Kingdom . ||| De la ler mak Enlernana yamuki-yama'ala , la la'pa Nmati dewade , Nmori owa'an pa lerni terampwogat ma'ta la noha wawannu de , Yesus mana Ntutga rupni re'eni wo'ir memna la mak Enhopan pa rodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni , ne Ntutga de Nmori owa'an olek la matmiatni ralamni totpena rpesiay miemna . Iramkek memna Yesus , ne Yesus Nakot nohora la ira , la emkameni la Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emek Ray ida .
Being assembled together with them , he commanded them , Do n't depart from Jerusalem , but wait for the promise of the Father , which you heard from me . ||| Ne la ' lerni Enora ir ra'an wutu rewre'wa , de Enakot lir dilla ira , Hyal miy re , yan mihgalia mliergot la Yerusalem di . Mpiei lia handi pa A'mu Nal memna E ' Nhiw Lululli mak Enettiarg oleka wa , mak A'ukot oleka tiy miy lia ' ler ululu .
For John indeed baptized in water , but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days from now . ||| Yoma A'ukot oleka tiy miy die Giwra , Yohansi nharania de nnairi gera . Mere hota ler wo'ir wal pia Uplerlawna Nala Nhiw Lululli pa Nodi plolli la miy .
Therefore , when they had come together , they asked him , Lord , are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel ? ||| La ' lerni la Yesus Nora mak Enhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re rawok taru , noma ratiana Yesus riwra , Matroma , hota la ' hadi de Matro'mu Niwra Nhi ' mak kodi plolli la hairi Israel totpena makden Roma edon nodi plolli mai ita ?
He said to them , It is n't for you to know times or seasons which the Father has set within his own authority . ||| Noma Yesus Nwahla lirni re , A A'mu nanpena ed mak kmeh ' a ketlia ler meni-mel mueni . Yana mihak nohora hade yatianni yoma A'mu nanpena Nodi plolli .
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you . You will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem , in all Judea and Samaria , and to the uttermost parts of the earth . ||| Mere hota miy di de , mliernana ruri-lai la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nerun la miy wawanmi . Ne hota miy mhi ' a riy maka ktutrier saksi niohora A lia ' a A li'ru-tu'nu la Yerusalem , Yudea uhunu-ewatni , Samaria ne nla ' pa ntutu-nte'ela noheri woru-lyanti nayanni .
When he had said these things , as they were looking , he was taken up , and a cloud received him out of their sight . ||| La'pa Yesus Nakot emkade pa nhorwua noma E ' ema rran nana pa Nha'at la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Ir orgahi ramkek memna la matni , pa la'pa kakma mana npupniahala Yesus la heyanna pa nod hial memna yamkekni re .
While they were looking steadfastly into the sky as he went , behold , two men stood by them in white clothing , ||| La'pa irwatniar rer mia'ta la lyanti maka Yesus Narian de , de plinu-plinnianamde riy woru rnair wawahrani pa rtutrier lia ir onni .
who also said , You men of Galilee , why do you stand looking into the sky ? This Jesus , who was received up from you into the sky , will come back in the same way as you saw him going into the sky . ||| Rrora rhar lirni riwra , Hoi Galile ' miy re ! Nihya'pa mimtiutrieria tehra la hande pa mpiatniar rer lia lyanti ? ! Yesus mak mimkeka Narian pa Nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha de , mimkek memn oleka me ? ! Hota Nawali pa Nmai die emkade owa'ana , emek ha mimkek de .
Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called Olivet , which is near Jerusalem , a Sabbath day 's journey away . ||| Nhorwua noma makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re , rwatiawu wo'or Saitun pa rawal lia Yerusalem . Wo'or Saitun de olietni la Yerusalem , de kilu ida .
When they had come in , they went up into the upper room where they were staying , that is Peter , John , James , Andrew , Philip , Thomas , Bartholomew , Matthew , James the son of Alphaeus , Simon the Zealot , and Judas the son of James . ||| Rodi liarni la roma tniau tiar geni ida . Noma rha'at la gen miak kden la heyanna , maka ir genni oleka wa . La ' ir honona de Petrus , Yohansi , Yakowsi , Andarias , Pilipsu , Tomsa , Bartolomeus , Matius , Yakowsi , Alpius a'nani , Simona mak kwayotlia memna Romawi rodi plolli la Israel , ne Yudas , Yakowsi a'nani .
All these with one accord continued steadfastly in prayer and supplication , along with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus , and with his brothers . ||| Ir honona de nhi'inde rla ' a ihru ida-ralm id la sniumbain la ' Uplerlawna . Nhi'inde ror wut wali Yesus hyalli re , Yesus inni Maria me , patke ' a korni wali pa rsumbaini .
In these days , Peter stood up in the middle of the disciples and the number of names was about one hundred twenty , and said , ||| La'pa la'awa lera ida , ne makpesiay re e rawok taru , de ir honona de edonna nhal de riy rahu ida terampworu . Noma Petrus naprir pia niwa naltieri . Lirni niwra ,
Brothers , it was necessary that this Scripture should be fulfilled , which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David concerning Judas , who was guide to those who took Jesus . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , hya ' maka ha rhorat tar lia ' Puk lawna ralamni de Uplerlawna Netlia pa hota ntutu-nte'ewa . De la it upni-tgarni lerni de , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Napre'et Daud nurnu pa nakot nohora oleka Yudas mak kla ' o'tani pa rtorna Yesus de .
For he was counted with us , and received his portion in this ministry . ||| Yoma Yudas de , it mutwualli ida de , ne hade wnialir nian walia pa it tora tkar wiutu .
Now this man obtained a field with the reward for his wickedness , and falling headlong , his body burst open and all his intestines gushed out . ||| Yudas di de , naweli oleka tani , nnairi kupna maka nlernana la ' a ya'olu Yesus , la riy mak kodia Yesus pa rwenna . Yudas nmati lia ' hande , de namehi-nayona , nlererun de o'tani nala ' ulu me apannu nahniarti , me tnie'eni nripu .
It became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem that in their language that field was called ‘ Akeldama , ' that is , ‘ The field of blood . ' ||| Kuku'uni-lalawanni la ' a Yerusalem natlin nan memna hya ' mak Yudas nhi ' a oleka , pede tan die rweta la Akaldama , nnia'eratni de rar tani .
For it is written in the book of Psalms , ‘ Let his habitation be made desolate . Let no one dwell in it , ' and , ‘ Let another take his office . ' ||| Yoma la ' a puk Masmur ralamni de e rhorat targa de lirni emkadi , Yeheni mana rdi'na , lia'arni mana rlo'wa . Ahu edonna ntowru . Hiwi edonna nkukule ' a . Genni nahgali ne riy edonna rdella . La'pa e rhorat tar wualia de emkadi wali , Mollia la la'pa wikgeni mana riy rta'wa hgerla rwarui-rwate'la . Mollia pa riy dom to ' a rla ' a mtatanni .
Of the men therefore who have accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us , beginning from the baptism of John to the day that he was received up from us , of these one must become a witness with us of his resurrection . ||| La hade pede itwalir niana riy ida totpena nwauga Yudas pa nor rewre'wa it pa tsi ' a tlin nohora-mat nohora , de Itmatromni Yesus Nmori owa'an olek la matmiatni ralamni . Twaliria riy de , de tamkek riy maka itor oleka tlernohor reria Yesus la meni-meni maka la ' lerni meman la Yohansi nharani , pa la'pa nte ' meman la Yesus Narian la noha wawannu pa Nokria Ilyamou-Watyatoha , de mak itden wal die .
They put forward two , Joseph called Barsabbas , who was also called Justus , and Matthias . ||| Noma riy mak kawok taru re rtut niana riy woru , id nanni Yusup . Rwet walia la Barsabas onde Yustus . Ne rwalir walia Matias .
They prayed and said , You , Lord , who know the hearts of all men , show which one of these two you have chosen to take part in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas fell away , that he might go to his own place . ||| Noma rsumbain nohora pa , rwaka plolli-mneheni la Uplerlawna . Rsumbain pa riwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Omuat niohor oleka la riy honona ihranu ralamni . Yudas ntuini olek la genni , emolmolla makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni pa e nmati olekwa , ne nla'awa geni maka hota nlernana hihi'ini-yapyapni wniahlani . Pede Matro'mu , orgahamu Mtiutga he ' a mak O ralammu nala pa nkar lia kniarmu di . La ' riy maroro ' a ri de , Mtiutga riy id pa nwauga Yudas .
They drew lots for them , and the lot fell on Matthias , and he was counted with the eleven apostles . ||| Rsumbain pa nhorwua , noma rhedga patui la riy maroro ' a re nanni . Noma rlernana Matias nanni . Pede rrana Matias pa nla ' a mak Yesus Nhopan pa rodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni nor rewre'wa mutwualli termida wehrani ida re .
Now when the day of Pentecost had come , they were all with one accord in one place . ||| La'pa Pentakosta lerni nte'ewa , dewade riy makpesiay honona rawok la geni ida .
Suddenly there came from the sky a sound like the rushing of a mighty wind , and it filled all the house where they were sitting . ||| Plinu-plinnianama ratlin de emek anin lawna nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha , pa nteni lia ' a rom maka ira rawok tar lia de .
Tongues like fire appeared and were distributed to them , and one sat on each of them . ||| Noma ramkek de , emeka ai lomarni nhakre'era pa ntai lia ira riy nenenna .
They were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak with other languages , as the Spirit gave them the ability to speak . ||| La ' ir honona , de Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli pede rna'ona ltierni rella la ' a yawala dom to ' a , yawetni re rlernohora neka hya ' maka Nhiw Lululli yawewalli la ir namni .
Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews , devout men , from every nation under the sky . ||| La ' ler de de , Yahudi rirahu rwatiawua hairi-hairi la meni-meni to ' pa e rawok tar lia Yerusalem . Ir honona re , er mak ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna .
When this sound was heard , the multitude came together and were bewildered , because everyone heard them speaking in his own language . ||| La'pa ratlin nana mak kyetin de , dewade riy harahu rawok la hande . Riy honona rheduma , yoma makpesiay re raltier die rnairi ir yawalli .
They were all amazed and marveled , saying to one another , Behold , are n't all these who speak Galileans ? ||| Riy honona ema rtaplelleltarga noma riwra , Hei , hari de riy makdena Galilea ri .
How do we hear , everyone in our own native language ? ||| Mere emkameni pede ir rawal targho ' a it yawalli ?
Parthians , Medes , Elamites , and people from Mesopotamia , Judea , Cappadocia , Pontus , Asia , ||| Riy Yahudi ita , itwatiawua Partia , Media , Elam , Mesopotamia , Yudea , Kapadokia , Pontus , Asia ,
Phrygia , Pamphylia , Egypt , the parts of Libya around Cyrene , visitors from Rome , both Jews and proselytes , ||| mak kwatiawu Firgia , Pamfilia , Mesir ne geni-tien mak kden la Libia mak rehgorgorga Kirene . Me doma e rwatiawu walia Roma , de
Cretans and Arabians-we hear them speaking in our languages the mighty works of God ! ||| riy Yahudi , me riy maka Yahudi atia ' a mak kla oleka agama Yahudi , me Yahudi mak kwatiawua Kreta , ne Arpa er wal lia . It hononit tatlina ir rawal it yawalli la hya ' a-hya ' a maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana , de mak it takenia twaror nana la ita kriahlanu , de Uplerlawna hihi'ini mak kodi it pa ta'uli-tawedi E ' a .
They were all amazed and were perplexed , saying to one another , What does this mean ? ||| Honona re ema rtaplelleltarga pa idma natian ida , Hya ' ed mak katota-kariei piede emkadino ?
Others , mocking , said , They are filled with new wine . ||| Mere riy dom pal pia e rwaliktia ' a pa ramola-rama ' a riwra , Ah , hare e rma'wu to ' pede rhi ' emkade .
But Peter , standing up with the eleven , lifted up his voice and spoke out to them , You men of Judea and all you who dwell at Jerusalem , let this be known to you , and listen to my words . ||| Noma Petrus naprir niohora makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni korni termida wehrani ida re , pa nakot la riy rahu mak kawok taru re . Nhaun pa nakot la re , Ina-nara ama-hyali , Yahudi me Yerusalem uhunu-riwni makpoi-makeka , hononmi mitlina me mhioratreri la eda di .
For these are n't drunken , as you suppose , seeing it is only the third hour of the day . ||| Ami edon ma'an nana-memun nan pa nhop ihru-nha ' rernu emeka ha mikota re . Yoma lera yawyawar ma'ta jam sembilan .
But this is what has been spoken through the prophet Joel , ||| La ' a hya ' mak ha rhi ' a di , de Uplerlawna Nhopan pa makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yoel nakot nohor oleka , niwra ,
‘ It will be in the last days , says God , that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh . Your sons and your daughters will prophesy . Your young men will see visions . Your old men will dream dreams . ||| Uplerlawna lirni , La'pa la'awa lera hohoni de , hota Aghuriernia A Nhiw Lulu'lu la riy mak kdella nohkerna-rai miaran di honona . La'pa upmu-a'namu patke ' a rora muanke ' a totpena rakot nohora hya'-hya ' maka A'ukota la ira , pa rakota la miy . Tuwu hararara-hatrapriapi , hota rdarat nana hya ' maka Agala pa iramkeka . Inmu-ammu hota rmi ' a mi ' maka Agala pa ir rmi ' a .
Yes , and on my servants and on my handmaidens in those days , I will pour out my Spirit , and they will prophesy . ||| La'pa atmi-wa'armi patke ' a rora muanke ' a makpesiay A ' u muana , Aghuriernia A Nhiw Lulu'lu la ' a ler de neka . Hota irakot nohora hya ' mak A'ukota la ira .
I will show wonders in the sky above , and signs on the earth beneath , blood , and fire , and billows of smoke . ||| Hota Aghi ' a hya ' a maka riy ramkeka de rheduma , nden la lyanti me hya ' a-hya ' a maka taken niana riy rwaror nana la ' a yawa , la ' noha wawannu , totpa Atiutga A ru'ru-la'yu . Hota rara nora ai , me mokla-mahu liawna la ' nohkerna wawannu .
The sun will be turned into darkness , and the moon into blood , before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes . ||| Hota lera nmati makarau , wolla nmermer pa emeka rara na'nama Orgahi lerni ntutu-nte'ewa , de ler maka hota Uplerlawna Ntutga rurni-laini , hititni-homhomarni ne Nhudi-npara la riy honona .
It will be that whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved . ' ||| Ne la'pa Orgahi lerni edon ntutu-nte ' ma'ta de , he ' mak kwaka yamori-yalewna la Orgahi-Orha ' a de hota nmori-nlewna .
Men of Israel , hear these words ! Jesus of Nazareth , a man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders and signs which God did by him among you , even as you yourselves know , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , riy Israel miy re , mitlina la ' a hya ' a mak a'ukota ri . Yesus makden Nasaret de , Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a pa Nmai lia tiy miy . Ne totpena miy hononmi miatga de , Uplerlawna ed mak khopna Yesus di pa Nmai , de Uplerlawna Nala rurni-laini la Yesus di , totpa Nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , pede riy ema rtaplelleltarga . Hare honona de miy hononmi miatg oleka toh ? !
him , being delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God , you have taken by the hand of lawless men , crucified and killed , ||| Nlernohora E wniaror wamueheni , pa Uplerlawna Netlia de Nala Yesus la ' miy . La'pa Nala la ' miy , noma orgahami miala la riy mak edonna klernohora Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni pa rla rwairia la auwlakra hananni . La ' a ululu memna Uplerlawna Nat niohora hare honona hota ntutu-nte'ewa .
whom God raised up , having freed him from the agony of death , because it was not possible that he should be held by it . ||| Hoi-kietra rlumu-rtella Yesus , mere edonna Ndella matmiati ralamni yoma Uplerlawna , orgahi Namori owa'an la genni . Hade emkade , yoma taken niana matmiati nodi plolli la ' Yesus .
For David says concerning him , ‘ I saw the Lord always before my face , for he is on my right hand , that I should not be moved . ||| La Yesus mak Uplerlawna Namori-nalewan di , de Daud nhorat tar wual lia , de niwra , Nhi'inde A'umkek mamainia Orgahi-Orha ' a Ntutrier lia A ga'yu . E Nden rer lia A o'nu , totpena riy edonna rawo ' l A ' u .
Therefore my heart was glad , and my tongue rejoiced . Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope , ||| Hade pede A ralmu nahepru , A nu'ru na'uli-nawedia E ' a . Ne Agha'ara ino'nu la Uplerlawna , de hota Amuormiori .
because you will not leave my soul in Hades , neither will you allow your Holy One to see decay . ||| Yoma O ' edonna Mtio'or doinia A lia noh mati-rai miolu . O ' edonna Muolin doinia lili'irmu-hopopanmu A ' u mak katlina-katailla O ' a , de Alier la noh mati-rai miolu , pa ih ' u ngehpa-nta'lu .
You made known to me the ways of life . You will make me full of gladness with your presence . ' ||| O ' ed mak ktutga talan mai A ' u , mak kod A lia mormiori . A yahepru de emekneka opli mak kha ' a yoma O ' e Muor A ' tialla .
Brothers , I may tell you freely of the patriarch David , that he both died and was buried , and his tomb is with us to this day . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyal miy re , mhiuria a ' pua ukot nohora ploloi-plele'era Daud it upni-tgarni maka ha rtota-rwawa de hihi'ini-yapyapni , maka miat niohora oleka re . Enmati olekwa me rkenia la liena olek wali wia . Hoini-kietarni de , ed ma'ta pa itamkek walia .
Therefore , being a prophet , and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body , according to the flesh , he would raise up the Christ to sit on his throne , ||| Mere la'pa Daud di nmormior mia'ta de , makwohorulu-ktatrulu id wali e ' a , ne nat niohora oleka Uplerlawna nnio'oni maka Enlokra-nhautu pa Nano'targa la Daud pa Niwra , Hota la ' a riy id la o duratmu-waitmu de , Ariana pa Nla ' a Ray pa emekwali o ' a .
he foreseeing this , spoke about the resurrection of the Christ , that his soul was n't left in Hades , and his flesh did n't see decay . ||| Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la Daud , pede natg olek wal lia hya ' maka Uplerlawna hota Nhi ' a-nyapia . La ' hade pede e nakot targa , hota Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar die , hota Nmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni . De Daud niwra edonna raltarga Ray Makamori-Kalewan de pa nden la noh mati-rai miolu pa inonni ngehpa-nta'la tar lia genni .
This Jesus God raised up , to which we all are witnesses . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Yesus di ed maka Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana la matmiatni ralamni . A hononami mamkek memna la a mat mamni .
Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God , and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit , he has poured out this which you now see and hear . ||| Uplerlawna Nran E ' pa Namtatan la gen tutullu , ne Ntemna lodna-hairi la limni , ne Nlernan walia Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak Amni Nano'targa mai am di . Ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli inhatta maka Yesus Nhurriernia oleka mai ami , de ed maka mitlin nohora-miat niohora la dodo'ondi .
For David did n't ascend into the heavens , but he says himself , ‘ The Lord said to my Lord , Sit by my right hand ||| Daud meman nek de edon narian pa nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nhi ' a ray . Mere Daud niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot la a Matromlawnu Yesus ,
until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet . ' ||| Muliwna Mumtatnu la ' A wa'lu malganna , la'pa A'utowra arwalmu pa ratniowar la O nayanmu .
Let all the house of Israel therefore know certainly that God has made him both Lord and Christ , this Jesus whom you crucified . ||| La hade pede Israel hononmi , totpena miatga de maka mlia mpiairia la auwlakra de , de Yesus inhatta maka Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a pa Nhi ' a Itmatromni me Ray makamori-kalewna ita .
Now when they heard this , they were cut to the heart , and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles , Brothers , what shall we do ? ||| La'pa mak kawok taru re ratlin nana emkade de ralamni rtuindoin la . Noma ratiana Petrus nora kniarwialli makodi Uplerlawna lirni re , riwra , Ama-hyal miy re , emkade de hota amhi ' a hya ' a wa ?
Peter said to them , Repent and be baptized , every one of you , in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins , and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit . ||| Petrus nakot la re , Miy hononmi mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi . Ne rwet la Yesus Kristus de , pa ra rharan miy , totpena Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'omi-halmi . Ne hota mliernana Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
For the promise is to you and to your children , and to all who are far off , even as many as the Lord our God will call to himself . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar die , de ed maka miy gahami , pa nodi liarni la ' miy duratmi-waitmi . Me la walia riy maka kden la olietleta , maka it Orgahani-Orha'ani Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu Npol wiali , totpa rmai E ' de , rlernan walia Uplerlawna Nhiwni de .
With many other words he testified and exhorted them , saying , Save yourselves from this crooked generation ! ||| Emkadella mak Petrus nakot nohora la ira . Me nal walia lir rahu pa nano ' a-na'atga re , totpena rpesiaya Yesus , totpena Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli . Nakot la re totpa yana rlernohora riy tuwu di nhiol yatyatni yoma hota Uplerlawna Nukmua riy mak edon kaplola re .
Then those who gladly received his word were baptized . There were added that day about three thousand souls . ||| Riy re liawanni rpesiaya Petrus lirni-tunnu re , noma rla ' pa rharania re . Rhor rrekna momuoga mak ka'itar la riy makpesiay re la ler de , la'pa edon nhal de , riy riwnu wotelu .
They continued steadfastly in the apostles ' teaching and fellowship , in the breaking of bread , and prayer . ||| Rod nieka lierlernohorni pa ratlina-ratailla makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re pa rla ihru ida-ralm ida . Ne nhi'inde ra'an wutu-remun wutu me rsumbain la Uplerlawna rewre'wa .
Fear came on every soul , and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles . ||| Makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re rhi ' a-ryap nieka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , nhi'nande riy honona ema rtaplelleltarga , ne ra'unni-ramta'ata Uplerlawna .
All who believed were together , and had all things in common . ||| Makpesiay honona ihru ida-ralm ida pa nodi liarni , ne hya ' maka etla ira , de honona rnair rewre'wa .
They sold their possessions and goods , and distributed them to all , according as anyone had need . ||| Lera dom pa riy ra'ol diodioinia yohya ' a mak ir gahani , de rhakar welli la ir honona , la ' rima-rima rlernana hya ' maka irakleha .
Day by day , continuing steadfastly with one accord in the temple , and breaking bread at home , they took their food with gladness and singleness of heart , ||| Lera-ler nekpa rawok la Uplerlawna romni kreini , ne la'pa ra'ana-remun rewre'wa la ir romni , me ramuki-rahepru , la ' walia ratu rhu'ru-rhelma .
praising God and having favor with all the people . The Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were being saved . ||| Ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna la ' lera-lera . Ir yehwani de rla ' nana riy honona ralamni . La ' lera-ler nekpa riy ra'ititar rer lia yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala la ira , riy maka kwahaka mormiori-lewlewna la Uplerlawna .
Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of prayer , the ninth hour . ||| La ' a lera ida Petrus nor Yohansi rla Uplerlawna roma kreini la ' lera nhierni , jam 3 rla ' pa rsumbaini , yoma makden Yahudi nhi'inde rsumbain la ' lera nhierni de .
A certain man who was lame from his mother 's womb was being carried , whom they laid daily at the door of the temple which is called Beautiful , to ask gifts for the needy of those who entered into the temple . ||| La ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini , de puohra liawanni ida maka ha rweta la Puohra Samomuou . La ' a puohra de , e rken tiarga muanke ' a ida , de ndel meman la apun ralma pa rmor dioinia de edonna nala ' a . Lera-ler nekpa rodia la hande , totpena nwaka kupan la mak kla ' a krei .
Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple , he asked to receive gifts for the needy . ||| La'pa namkek nana Petrus nora Yohansi rmai pia riwra rler la Uplerlawna roma kreini , noma nwak kupna la rrora .
Peter , fastening his eyes on him , with John , said , Look at us . ||| Noka Petrus nora Yohansi ramkek tutga muanke ' de , noma Petrus nakot la , Mumkek mai ami !
He listened to them , expecting to receive something from them . ||| Noma muanke ' de namkek la rrora , natniekamde hota rrora ral hadom la e ' a .
But Peter said , I have no silver or gold , but what I have , that I give you . In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth , get up and walk ! ||| Mere Petrus nakot la , A'ukleh et miemna kupna-kai . Mere hya ' a maka ed mai a ' u , de hota agal hade tiy o ' a pa dodo'ondi , a'ukot tiy o ' de Yesus Kristus mak kwatiawua Nasaret de Nodi plolli pa mula'awa !
He took him by the right hand and raised him up . Immediately his feet and his ankle bones received strength . ||| Noma Petrus ntorreria muanke ' de limni walli malganna pa nhi ' a pa ntutrieri . Mtatande nekpa lakni oratni mana naple'era , me torni mana naruri pia naprir wia .
Leaping up , he stood and began to walk . He entered with them into the temple , walking , leaping , and praising God . ||| Nhi'nande pleta-plet pa naprir lia genni pa nala ' meman wa . Nhorwua noma nor wutga Petrus me Yohansi rala ' a la Uplerlawna roma kreini pa nla ' a-nmai nneniehu-ntertera , me na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna .
All the people saw him walking and praising God . ||| Riy honona ramkek reria nala ' a olekwa , ne na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna ,
They recognized him , that it was he who used to sit begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple . They were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him . ||| na'nama ratga de muanke ' mak kmeh ' a kawakwaka inhatta , maka nhi'inde kden lawan la Puohra Samomuou la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini gaini . Riy honona ema rtaplelleltarga , pa rheran doin la .
As the lame man who was healed held on to Peter and John , all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon 's , greatly wondering . ||| Muanke ' de ntorreria Petrus nor Yohansi limni pa nlernohor reria re . Ne la'pa ir wotelu rte'ela kalarei maka rweta la Salomo Kalareini de , riy honona rma rpepan reria la pa ramkek ira , yoma ema rtaplelleltarga .
When Peter saw it , he responded to the people , You men of Israel , why do you marvel at this man ? Why do you fasten your eyes on us , as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk ? ||| La'pa Petrus namkek nana riy rahu re , noma nakot la re , Israel miy re ! Nihya'pa mimpier rier wiapmi la mak emkadina ? ! Ne la ' hya ' pede mimkek reri ami ? Yana mimpiarora de hadi nala ' olekwa , de yoma amodi plolli onde la ' a am di de riy ploloi-plele'era la Uplerlawna .
The God of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , the God of our fathers , has glorified his Servant Jesus , whom you delivered up and denied in the presence of Pilate , when he had determined to release him . ||| Mere mitlina . Uplerlawna mak Abrahama , Isak , Yakop , me it upni-tgarni ha rkola tieru-rawur nehla la de , ed maka Nhi ' pa hopopanni Yesus Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi . Yesus de ed maka miy miala la mak kodi plolli , me mhiedga la Pilatus gaini yoma mihmena mrieiniana-mia'nana Yesus emek Ray ida pa mitlin la lirni , la lerni la Pilatus niwa nolin doini Yesus .
But you denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked for a murderer to be granted to you , ||| Riy di maka ploloi-plele'era me Nakleha do ' a-hala , mere mriehera . Ne miy mhioka temna ne mioir reria totpena Pilatus nolin doinia riy makwunu-makwenan la ' miy .
and killed the Prince of life , whom God raised from the dead , to which we are witnesses . ||| Mimpienna E ' a . Mere la ' E ' pede , rimormiori rler la mormior plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Ne Uplerlawna Namori oleka pa Nmori lia matmiatni . Ameh ' a meman nek de mlin nohora-mmat nohora de Yesus Nmori owa'ana la matmiatni ralamni .
By faith in his name , his name has made this man strong , whom you see and know . Yes , the faith which is through him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all . ||| Miy hononmi mimkek oleka la matmi la ' a hya ' maka itamkeka la riy di . E nkalwied olek la ' a liuta-kperanni , yoma Yesus Nkar lia ralamni pa npesiaya , noka la ' a e npesiay Yesus pede , nkalwied wa pa hononmi mimkeka .
Now , brothers , I know that you did this in ignorance , as did also your rulers . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , dodo'ondi agatga la ' a hya ' maka miora miy o'tami-matmi mhi ' oleka la Yesus de , de miplin niohora de Yesus de Ray mak kamori-kalewna ita .
But the things which God announced by the mouth of all his prophets , that Christ should suffer , he thus fulfilled . ||| Mere Uplerlawna ed maka Nhur niohora pa mhi ' emkade , yoma Nakot targ oleka la ululu memna , la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu honona lirni , de hota Ray Makamori-Kalewan de Nmai die Nler la yamuki-yama'ala pa hota Nmati .
Repent therefore , and turn again , that your sins may be blotted out , so that there may come times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord , ||| La ' hade pede awuak de mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi re , ne mai pia mliernohora Uplerlawna totpena Namou-nawitan miy lia ' a do'omi-halmi .
and that he may send Christ Jesus , who was ordained for you before , ||| Ne hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhi ' aruri miy ralamni me Nhi ' aruri-alai miy pesiaymi totpena naruri-na'orta . Ne hota Nhopna Yesus Nmai lia miy , yoma la ' miy rerieimi , de Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a Yesus pa la ' a Ray mak kamori-kalewna miy .
whom heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things , which God spoke long ago by the mouth of his holy prophets . ||| Hota Endella genni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , pa la'pa Uplerlawna Nhi ' nohkerkeran di pa warwuarga , emeka Uplerlawna Nakot targa la makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak khima-kre ' E ' a , de lirni la ' a ler ululu .
For Moses indeed said to the fathers , ‘ The Lord God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers , like me . You shall listen to him in all things whatever he says to you . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , makwohorulu-ktatrulu Musa mana nakot oleka de , Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu maka mkiola tieru-miawur nehla , de hota Nhopan doinia makwohorulu-ktatrulu id la ' miy hairi wamuehemi , pa emekwalia Enhopn Musa a ' u . Hononmi mitlin la hya ' maka makwohorulu-ktatrul die , ha nakota honona re .
It will be that every soul that will not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among the people . ' ||| La'pa riy meni edonna natlina-natailla makwohorulu-ktatrul die , riy de hota rreidioinia la Uplerlawna mutnu , pa nler la niukum matmiati-molmuolu . Hade pede mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei do'omi-halmi .
Yes , and all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed after , as many as have spoken , also told of these days . ||| Yaho'ma makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak ululu honona , nwauga la Samuel lerni pa , la'pa mak ktaw ler li'iru , honona re rakot nohora Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni la it tuwnu di .
You are the children of the prophets , and of the covenant which God made with our fathers , saying to Abraham , ‘ All the families of the earth will be blessed through your offspring . ' ||| Ne nnielu-niau maka Uplerlawna Nakota la makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni , me la ' a upmi-tgarmi re , nnio'oni de e ntai miy wiali . Yoma Uplerlawna Nakot la Abraham de emkadi , La ' a o duratmu-waitmu de , hota Agala hairi-hairi honona pa remun la ger tliwtliwu , me rler la wewan potpioti rlernana ra ' a-palu .
God , having raised up his servant Jesus , sent him to you first to bless you , in turning away every one of you from your wickedness . ||| La ' hade pede Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a hopopanni de , pa nmai ul miy die , totpena mliernana ra ' a-palu . Ra ' a-palu de yala'ani , de Uplerlawna Nkar lia ralammi totpa miy hononmi mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi .
As they spoke to the people , the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them , ||| La'pa Petrus nora Yohansi raltiertier mia'ta dewade imam-imam re ror mak khi ' o'tani la mak katiaka Uplerlawna roma kreini , me riy makden Saduki rma rawenan la Petrus nor Yohansi .
being upset because they taught the people and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead . ||| Rawenan la yoma rrora rwatutu-rwaye ' a Yesus lirni-tunnu , ne riwra Yesus Nmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni pede hota mak kmati olekwa mana hota rmori owa'ana .
They laid hands on them , and put them in custody until the next day , for it was now evening . ||| La ' a lir de , pede rte'la la rrora pa rla rwi'ita la roma nhio'la . Ne yoma rtorna rrora de lera nmel olek wa , pede rwei pia repra nanpena rwalol nohora .
But many of those who heard the word believed , and the number of the men came to be about five thousand . ||| Mere riy mak kpesiay olek makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni wniatutnu-wniaye'eni de , de edonna nhal de riy riwnu wolima .
In the morning , their rulers , elders , and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem . ||| Repar noma mak ktorna agama watghudi , de Yahudi in letni-am letni , rora makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama , rawok momuou lia Yerusalem .
Annas the high priest was there , with Caiaphas , John , Alexander , and as many as were relatives of the high priest . ||| Imam o'ta lawanni Hanas me , e huwnu-woinni de Kayafas , Yohansi , Aleksander , me huwnu-woinni dom pali , er wal lia hande .
When they had stood Peter and John in the middle of them , they inquired , By what power , or in what name , have you done this ? ||| Ir rodia Petrus nora Yohansi la hare gaini , na'nama ratiana irrora , Ee , mimrio ' a mhi ' emkameni pede riy maka inonni kmat die nkalwieda ? He ' mak kala ruri-lai tiy miy pede mhi ' hadena ?
Then Peter , filled with the Holy Spirit , said to them , You rulers of the people and elders of Israel , ||| Petrus mak Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la , nakot la re , U'pu-matro'mu mak kodi plolli la Yahudi ita , me la ' wali u'pu-matro'mu korni mak ktorna agama watghudni .
if we are examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man , by what means this man has been healed , ||| U'pu-matro'mu mak khopan pa a'ultieri pede reiniande awualol nohora hihi ' mamni-yapyap miamni . Miodi am lia watghudi lokarni me tatiaili pniarni , yoma la ' a kalwied mamni la amhi ' kalwieda mak inonni kmati . Ne u'pu-matro'mu riwra ratian walia pa rat niohora la emkameni riy de nkalwied la mehrani-maunu .
may it be known to you all , and to all the people of Israel , that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth , whom you crucified , whom God raised from the dead , this man stands here before you whole in him . ||| Hade pede a'ukota hadi , totpa u'pu-matro'mu la'pa Israel wal miana , miy hononmi miatga , riy di naprir lia it gaini la dodo'ondi , de onnila ruri-lai me plola-mneha Yesus Kristusa riy Nasaret de . U'pu-matro'mu hononmi er mak kakot pa rla rwairia E la auwlakar de . Mere Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Namori owa'ana la ' a matmiatni ralamni .
He is ‘ the stone which was regarded as worthless by you , the builders , which has become the head of the corner . ' ||| Yesus de inhatta , maka ha rakotkota la Puklawna ralamni de emkadilla lirni , Wat muaka tukna-tukna miy edonna mniair nana pa mhi ' a roma-lewu , mere misrala , de Uplerlawna Nnairia olek pa Nhi ' a la watu liar pianulu .
There is salvation in no one else , for there is no other name under heaven that is given among men , by which we must be saved ! ||| La'pa he ' a maka klernohora Yesus , de talla kmeh ' a inhatta pa tler la mormiori-dardiar plalahwa ralamni . Yoma la ' a noheri woru-lyanti nayan di , eneknek to ' a Yesus Nmeh ' a maka Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori ita .
Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John , and had perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men , they marveled . They recognized that they had been with Jesus . ||| Makhudi-makpara honona re rwarora-rwalaiya , de Petrus nora Yohansi parania la ltierni-tianni re , emkameni ho'mana edon la ' meman la iskola , nhi'nande hare ema rtaplelleltarga . Makhudi re rwaror owa'ana , de irrora ratu raltieri-raltiani yoma nhi'inde ror oleka Yesus pa rlidan wutu .
Seeing the man who was healed standing with them , they could say nothing against it . ||| Ne ramkek rer miemna riy mak kalwied olek la nnieni-nhien de , e ntutrieri lia honona re gaini ralamni , pede ir edonna rhi ' a kokokna-rariarni doma .
But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council , they conferred among themselves , ||| Noma rhopan pa Petrus nora Yohansi rlergot la hande totpena o'ta-mata re rakot nohora hya ' a mak hota rhi ' a .
saying , What shall we do to these men ? Because indeed a notable miracle has been done through them , as can be plainly seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem , and we ca n't deny it . ||| Nhor nioka idma nakot la ida , Hota itakota hya ' a la ha rora ? Yerusalem uhunu-riwriwni rat momuog oleka la irrora mak khi ' nana hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat mak riy edon ramkek taru , pa nhi'nande riy honona ema rtaplelleltarga . It edonna treher doinia hade .
But so that this spreads no further among the people , let 's threaten them , that from now on they do n't speak to anyone in this name . ||| Mere totpa la'pa mak ha rhi ' nana la riy di yana nwewar la noheri woru , de mai pia takot la irrora totpena yan memmemna rrora rakot nohora Yesus la he ' a-he ' a .
They called them , and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus . ||| Noma rpolg owa'ana makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni rora , pa rmai owa'an la rialma , ne rwagahniorta re pa , yan memmemna rwatutu-rwaye ' de rakot nohora Yesus la he ' a-he ' a .
But Peter and John answered them , Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God , judge for yourselves , ||| Mere Petrusa nora Yohansi rwalolla , La ' a wniaror wamuehemi de , hya ' a mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni ? Amlernohor miy me , amlernohora Uplerlawna ?
for we ca n't help telling the things which we saw and heard . ||| Hota ami edonna mren am lia yaltieri la ' a hya ' mak amamkek oleka , me hya ' maka amatlin oleka .
When they had further threatened them , they let them go , finding no way to punish them , because of the people , for everyone glorified God for that which was done . ||| Maktorna agama watghudni re honona edonna rlernana talan pa rukmua Petrus nora Yohansi yoma yeher to ' a pa riy honona ra'uli-rawedi Uplerlawna . Pede rho'or temna rrora na'nama rwagahniorta , noma rolin doinia rrora la .
For the man on whom this miracle of healing was performed was more than forty years old . ||| Riy honona ratga de , hadi de Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni yoma riy maka kler olek la kalwieda la mehrani-maunu ralamni de , anni terampwogat rehenu .
Being let go , they came to their own company and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them . ||| La'pa rolin doinia Petrus nora Yohansi noma , rawali owa'an la mutwualli re , me rwahauru momuoga la ' a hya ' maka imam-imam o'tani-matni re , rora Yahudi in letni-am letni rakota la ira .
When they heard it , they lifted up their voice to God with one accord and said , O Lord , you are God , who made the heaven , the earth , the sea , and all that is in them , ||| La'pa mutwualli re ratlin ha rakota re , noma honona rewre'wa rsumbain pa rakot la Uplerlawna , riwra , Matroma ! O ' ed maka kodi plolli la hanek-harahu wuawannu , O ' nanpena ed mak kakoki-kayapi nohkerna-lyanit marna , la'pa gera-tah ' i nor wutga ihini-turnu .
who by the mouth of your servant David , said , ‘ Why do the nations rage , and the peoples plot a vain thing ? ||| O ' Nhipmu Napre'et up mamni-tgar mamni ray Daud mak kla ' hopopanmu de nurnu , pa Omiwra , Nihya'pa hairi-hairi maka Yahudi atia ' a rahankerna , me la ' a hya ' pede makden Yahudi rna'ohma ha tia'ta ' a ?
The kings of the earth take a stand , and the rulers plot together , against the Lord , and against his Christ . ' ||| Ray-ray marna-wuhura noha wawannu , me maktorna-makrautu rla ' lir id pa ratlinnon keran la Orgahi-Orha ' a , me riy maka Ha Nano'targa pa la ' a Ray la yamori-yalewna , totpa rora ra'ara !
For truly , both Herod and Pontius Pilate , with the Gentiles and the people of Israel , were gathered together against your holy servant Jesus , whom you anointed , ||| Maka Daud nakota naplola , yoma la ' toto ' meman la Herodes me Pontius Pilatus rna'ohma pa rora makden Israel me makden Israel atia ' a pa rla ' lir ida la ' a let di . Rna'ohma la wniatromni pa rlewria Yesus , hopopanmu mak kakleh do ' a-hal de , maka Omtiutmuata-mkewra ' a oleka la Ray , pa Namori-nalewan rimormiori .
to do whatever your hand and your counsel foreordained to happen . ||| Honona rla ' lir id pa rhi ' a hya ' maka Mula'ul pua Omukot tar oleka pa hota ntutu-nte'ewa . Ne la'pa hya ' a maka Mukot taru re de riora-liai wamuehemu la ' liwangenmu-mtatangenmu .
Now , Lord , look at their threats , and grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness , ||| Dodo'ondi de ampak de matmu reprepar la tulu lyanti , me tlinmu mana Mhuer tiarga la polpuol muamni . Yan Muolin limmu me , Mpue'er rormu la ami yoma e rna'ohma pa rhi ' yatyatni mai ami . Ne Mpualoi-mpuahyaria talla mai hopopanmu ami totpena amparan pia amodia nanmu pa nla nwewar la noha wawannu .
while you stretch out your hand to heal , and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy Servant Jesus . ||| Muala rurmu-laimu mai ami totpena amhi ' a riy mak kamehra pa rkalwieda , la'pa amhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga O rurmu-laimu pede riy ema rtaplelleltarga . Yoma Yesus , hopopanmu mak kakleha do ' a-hala de ed mak kodi plolli mai ami .
When they had prayed , the place was shaken where they were gathered together . They were all filled with the Holy Spirit , and they spoke the word of God with boldness . ||| La'pa rsumbain pa nhorwua dewade gen miak ha rdella , de nwolwo'la . Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la ira pa Napre'et nurnu-nwaran namni re honona , pa la ' pa rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni de edonna rmakukga ramta'ata .
The multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul . Not one of them claimed that anything of the things which he possessed was his own , but they had all things in common . ||| Makpesiay honona re rla ' a ihru ida-ralm ida . Riy id mana edonna nahora-natawlia ida . Hya ' maka riy ida hyonni-hyanni de , honona rnair rewre'wa .
With great power , the apostles gave their testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus . Great grace was on them all . ||| Rnairia plola-mneh lawan de pa makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni ral kota-ral de'et la pa nodi liarni , rakot nohora la ' a Itmatromlawanni Yesus de , Nmori olek owa'an la matmiatni ralamni . Ne Uplerlawna Ntera-ndem reri makpesiay honona re .
For neither was there among them any who lacked , for as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them , and brought the proceeds of the things that were sold , ||| La ' a riy id la ir mana edon nakleha-naplara , yoma la ' a ir pa he ' a nohananni etla me he ' a romni etla , de orgahi na'olga pa weli kupna de , rodia
and laid them at the apostles ' feet , and distribution was made to each , according as anyone had need . ||| pa rawoka la makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re wokni letgara . Nhorwua demade kupan yawoka re ra'ala pa ra rhima-rre ' a maka kakleha-kaplara .
Joses , who by the apostles was also called Barnabas which is , being interpreted , Son of Encouragement , a Levite , a man of Cyprus by race , having a field , sold it and brought the money and laid it at the apostles ' feet . ||| Emkade wal lia ' Yusup . E ' wal pia na'olga nohananni , pa welli de nala la makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni . Yusup de , de riy Lewi ida duratni-waitni mak kwatiawua Siprus . Makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re , rpolga Yusup de Barnabas , nnia'eratni de mak khi ' aruri rira ralamni .
But a certain man named Ananias , with Sapphira his wife , sold a possession , ||| La ' a riy la hande , de muanke ' ida nwawa Ananias . patke'eni nwawa Safira . Ler ida ne nor hawni ra'olu nohananni ida .
and kept back part of the price , his wife also being aware of it , then brought a certain part and laid it at the apostles ' feet . ||| Welli kupna , noma nade ' korni me , nal korni la makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni . Nhi ' hare de patke'eni nat niohor walia .
But Peter said , Ananias , why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back part of the price of the land ? ||| Noma Petrus nakot la , Ananias , nihya'pa omuolin hegana amlawanni nwawa Setan pa nodia plolli la ' o ralammu , pa la'pa o ' muakla oleka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli pa o ' e muwunum targa kupna korni pa o wamuehemu ? !
While you kept it , did n't it remain your own ? After it was sold , was n't it in your power ? How is it that you have conceived this thing in your heart ? You have n't lied to men , but to God . ||| Tan die o gahamu . La'pa omu'ol ho'mana o gahamu ha welli . Ne hya ' nrei pia o ralma-riormu nod o ' la ralma-rior dena ? ! O ' edonna mulahar rimormiori mere o ' e mulahara Uplerlawna !
Ananias , hearing these words , fell down and died . Great fear came on all who heard these things . ||| La'pa Ananias natlin nana lir de , dewade napru'wu la yawa dewade nwaran doinia aranni nmati . Riy honona ratlin tar hade de ramta'at wenna .
The young men arose and wrapped him up , and they carried him out and buried him . ||| Hatrapriapi rma rtomna Ananias inonni pa rodgiota , rla pa rkenia la liena ralamni .
About three hours later , his wife , not knowing what had happened , came in . ||| La'pa edon nalo'on wali jam wotelu rlardoinla , dewade patke'eni nma nler la rialma . Edon nat mua'ta hya ' maka muanke'eni nlernan oleka wa .
Peter answered her , Tell me whether you sold the land for so much . She said , Yes , for so much . ||| Petrus nakot la , Mukot nohor teka tan miaka omuor muanke'emu mi'ol die weli irhatti na ? Safira niwra , Plola welli irhatti .
But Peter asked her , How is it that you have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord ? Behold , the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door , and they will carry you out . ||| Noma Petrus nakot la , Nihya'pa omuora muanke'emu mlia ' ralm id pa mtia'ga Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhiw Lululli ? Mumkek oo ! Mak kla ' ktamni o muanke'emu e rmai wia de . Hota ir wal pia rodgiot o ' a .
She fell down immediately at his feet and died . The young men came in and found her dead , and they carried her out and buried her by her husband . ||| La ' a mtatan de nekpa Safira nlitir la yawa , de natuinia aranni la ' a Petrus gaini ralamni . Pede la'pa tuwari re rler la rialam de rlernan neka pat de nmati olekwa . Noma ra ' wal lia pa rodi rla rkenia la muanke'eni onni .
Great fear came on the whole assembly , and on all who heard these things . ||| Riy makpesiay re honona rora riy meheni-letanni la'pa ratlin nana hihi ' a-yapyap die , de ramta'at matmiati .
By the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were done among the people . They were all with one accord in Solomon 's porch . ||| Noma makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re rhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona harahu , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini nhi'nande riy ema rtaplelleltarga . Makpesiay honona nhi'inde rawoka-rale'elia Uplerlawna roma kreini , la gen miaka rweta la Salomo Kalareini .
None of the rest dared to join them , however , the people honored them . ||| Ne mak edonna kpesiay mia'ta , de ir edonna rparan pia rler wut lia ' ir la rialma . Mere makpesiay re honona de , mak kden hande ratu ra'unni-ramta'ata me rhu'ru-rhelma re .
More believers were added to the Lord , multitudes of both men and women . ||| Ne makpesiay Yesus ra'ititar rer lia ' patke ' a rora muanke ' a .
They even carried out the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mattresses , so that as Peter came by , at least his shadow might overshadow some of them . ||| Riy ramkek nana makodi Uplerlawna lirni de rhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona harahu re pede rla ' pa rkeni mak kamehra-kamau re la lewu , onde rkenia la u'ti pa rodia la talla ralamni , totpena la'pa Petrus edon nteman la ira , hornama nwehweti de memannu ntaiya .
The multitude also came together from the cities around Jerusalem , bringing sick people and those who were tormented by unclean spirits , and they were all healed . ||| Riy rwalidlidan pa rmai rwatiaga leta-leta mak rehgorgorga Yerusalem pa rmai . Rmai die rora mak kamehra-kamau , me maka hegana ha rhu'ru ralma dewade honona rler la kalwiedni .
But the high priest rose up , and all those who were with him which is the sect of the Sadducees , and they were filled with jealousy ||| La'pa edon nalo'on wali ne imam lawna , me mutwualli re honona la ' a riy Saduki mniotni re , ralamni ramehra rehia .
and laid hands on the apostles , then put them in public custody . ||| Makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re , de riy Saduki rtorna pa rwi'ita la roma nhio'la .
But an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by night , and brought them out and said , ||| Mere la'pa nmel wa , dewade Orgahi hopopanni-lili'irnu ida nma nhari roma nhio'la nhiarni pa nodgiota makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu rella tio'ora . Orgahi hopopanni-lili'irnu de nakot la re ,
Go stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life . ||| Mlia ' pa mtiutrieri lia Uplerlawna roma kreini , ne mikot nohor momuoga mormiori-dardiari warwuaru la riy mak kden hande .
When they heard this , they entered into the temple about daybreak and taught . But the high priest and those who were with him came and called the council together , with all the senate of the children of Israel , and sent to the prison to have them brought . ||| Noma makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re rlernohora Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu de yawewalli . Yawyawar ma'ta de rla'awa Uplerlawna roma kreini pa rpanulga la wniatutu-wniaye'ela hande . Edon nalo'on wali ne imam lawna me riy Saduki re , rmai owa'an pa rpolga o'ta-mata Yahudi korni honona pa rma rawoka . Ir honona er mak ketlia agama Yahudi lirni-tunnu . Rmai totpena ramtatan wut rewre'wa pa rakot nohora riy makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re . Noma rhopan pa rla rala makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re la ' roma nhio'la , pa rma rwatrom la mak kla o'ta-mata re gaini .
But the officers who came did n't find them in the prison . They returned and reported , ||| Mere la'pa riy maka ha rhopna re rte'ela roma nhio'la ralamni , de edonna rlernana makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re la hande . Noma rawal pia rla rakota o'ta-mata mak ktorna agama watghudni re ,
We found the prison shut and locked , and the guards standing before the doors , but when we opened them , we found no one inside ! ||| riwra , Tuna-tuna sukni de amla ' a roma nhio'la , mere ami edonna mlernan hare , ne nhiari nhio'lani mana e npit wuenna . Me mak katiaka roma nhio'la mana e npitu-nkora . Mere la'pa amhari nhiari pa ampahaka , de riy id mana edonna nayoh ' a-nakpiatlia rialma .
Now when the high priest , the captain of the temple , and the chief priests heard these words , they were very perplexed about them and what might become of this . ||| La la'pa perwira mak kla ' o'tani la Uplerlawna roma kreini yatiakni , ne imam-imam o'tani-matni ratlin nana mak kla kala re lirni , de honona re ralamni worworga , ne riwra , La'pa rmolu emkadi de hota emkameni owa'ana ?
One came and told them , Behold , the men whom you put in prison are in the temple , standing and teaching the people . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne muanke ' id nma nodia kot la ' a mak ktahana re niwra , Mitlina am miy re , riy maka tuna-tuna ha rtahana re , e rtepartarlia wniatutu-wniaye'ela Uplerlawna roma kreini .
Then the captain went with the officers , and brought them without violence , for they were afraid that the people might stone them . ||| Noma o'ta-mata la mak katiaka Uplerlawna roma kreini nor wutga limni-rorni rla rala re , mere irla ' de rwanapal lirni la re , yoma ramta'ata yanhi'pa rimormior riahu re ral watu rwatliewur wenna re .
When they had brought them , they set them before the council . The high priest questioned them , ||| Rodia rpa rmai wia noma rottiarga la o'ta-mata lalawna mak ktorna agama watghudi gaini . Noma imam lawna nakot la re ,
saying , Did n't we strictly command you not to teach in this name ? Behold , you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching , and intend to bring this man 's blood on us . ||| Hoi , ampolliohora olek miy wia pa yana mpiatutu-mpiaye ' , de yana mhieik la riy de nanni . Mere miy edonna mhie'du nan kuku ' a lir mamni . Miy e mpiatutu-mpiaye ' de nwewr olek la Yerusalem . Rerehniana miwra la a hihi ' mamni pede riy de nmati .
But Peter and the apostles answered , We must obey God rather than men . ||| Petrus nora mutwualli rwalolla , Am miy re , amlernohora Uplerlawna . Mere ami edonna mlernohora rimormiori ida .
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus , whom you killed , hanging him on a tree . ||| Amlernohora Uplerlawna , pa makot nohora Yesus , yoma Yesus maka mlia mpiairia la auwlakra hananni , de Uplerlawna mak it upni-tgarni rkola tieru-rawur nehla la , Namori olek owa'ana la ' a matmiatni ralamni .
God exalted him with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior , to give repentance to Israel , and remission of sins . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nal olek walia E ' la gen tutulu , pa E ' ed mak ktoran reria krita o'tani-hairi lia wuwannu nodi plolli me totpa E ' ed maka kamori-kalewna ita , totpena hairi Israel nlernan talan pa rhoitio'ora-rtahnei lia do ' a-hala , ne totpena Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli .
We are his witnesses of these things , and so also is the Holy Spirit , whom God has given to those who obey him . ||| Ami er mak khi ' tlin nohora-mat nohora la ' a hare honona . La'pa Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , maka Uplerlawna Nala la riy emekto ' a ami mak katlin la E lirni , E ' mana Nakot nohora Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni me ralma-riorni di .
But they , when they heard this , were cut to the heart , and were determined to kill them . ||| La'pa o'ta-mata mak ktorna agama watghudni ratlin nan emkade , dewade yeher to'ama ralamni re ramehra , noma rawali owa'an pa rna'ohma wniunu-wnienna la makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re .
But one stood up in the council , a Pharisee named Gamaliel , a teacher of the law , honored by all the people , and commanded to put the apostles out for a little while . ||| Mere la ' o'ta-mata mak ktorna agama watghudi , de riy Parisi id ed walia nanni Gamaliel . Gamaliel de , de makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama ida de . Tungkur maka nhi'inde makden Yahudi honona rhu'ru-rhelma . Naprir pia nhopna rodia makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu re pa rla'awa tio'ora pleini .
He said to them , You men of Israel , be careful concerning these men , what you are about to do . ||| Nhor nioma nakot la o'ta-mat la woklawan de niwra , O'ta-mata ina-ama Israel , la'pa hya ' maka hota miy e mhi ' a la hari , de nhioratmi la ' temmi . Yanpa hari rwatiawua Uplerlawna .
For before these days Theudas rose up , making himself out to be somebody , to whom a number of men , about four hundred , joined themselves . He was slain , and all , as many as obeyed him , were dispersed and came to nothing . ||| Yoma aghoratrer mia'ta la ululu de Teudas nmai die nhi ' inonni de emeka o'ta-mata lawna ida pede edonna ghal de riy rahu wogata rler wut lia pa rmalawna makden Roma o'tani-matni re . Mere rwenna Teudas , ne mak kler wut lia re to ' a-taiya , ne e hihi'ini mana nwal lia hamamuamua .
After this man , Judas of Galilee rose up in the days of the enrollment , and drew away some people after him . He also perished , and all , as many as obeyed him , were scattered abroad . ||| Hade nhorwua noma la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la ler maka rrekna rimormiori honona , de Yudas riy Galile ' de nmai owa'ana , ne yoma riy ratlina ltierni-tianni , noma riy rahu rlitna-rtaur wut lia pa rmalawan la Roma . Mere plinu-plinnianamde , riy rwenan nana Yudas . Noma mak klidna-ktaur wut lia re , to ' a-tai wialia .
Now I tell you , withdraw from these men and leave them alone . For if this counsel or this work is of men , it will be overthrown . ||| Pede la ' dodo'ondi de itwera it matni la ' a yohya ' a mak emkadi . A'ukot targa la miy , yana itseik la rimormiori ri . Miolin doinia ir la . Yoma la'pa wniatutnu me yehwani nwatiawua rimormiori , de hota emolmolan neka Teudas me Yudas hihi'ini de hota nwal lia hamamuamua .
But if it is of God , you will not be able to overthrow it , and you would be found even to be fighting against God ! ||| Mere la'pa ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna , de hota ta'enniana mial ir la yawa . Ne hota miy di ed maka kora Uplerlawna idma nodlia ' a-nodmiai ida . Gamaliel yano'oni-yanatnu , de o'ta-mata mak ktorna agama watghudni re rreiniana-ra'nana .
They agreed with him . Summoning the apostles , they beat them and commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus , and let them go . ||| Noma rpolga makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni rpa rliwra-rkaklia . Nhor nioma rano ' a rpa yan memmemna rwatutga riy pa ratga Yesus , nhor nia'nama rolin doinia rla .
They therefore departed from the presence of the council , rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for Jesus ' name . ||| Makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re rlergot la gen die , rahepur toto ' memna yoma ratga de Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a ira , pa rlernana yamuki-yama'ala , me yamola-yama ' a , la ' a Yesus rerieini .
Every day , in the temple and at home , they never stopped teaching and preaching Jesus , the Christ . ||| Me la ' a lera-ler nekpa la Uplerlawna roma kreini , me riy romni-lewnu npenpuen lia riy mak katlina ira wniatutnu-wniaye'eni , la ' a Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' Yesus de E ' de Ray Makamori-Kalewna mak Uplerlawna Nano'taru , inhatta .
Now in those days , when the number of the disciples was multiplying , a complaint arose from the Hellenists against the Hebrews , because their widows were neglected in the daily service . ||| Maklernohora Yesus ra'ititar rer lia liawanni . La ' ler de , de Yahudi mak kawal Yunani rora Yahudi mak kawal Ibrani edon rkalwieda . Maka Yunani re riwra , A'na pat mamni mak kapalu , edonna rlernana yamanna la ' lera-lera maka ha rhakar targ oleka la ' a riy nenenna .
The twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples and said , It is not appropriate for us to forsake the word of God and serve tables . ||| La ' hade pede makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni termida wehrani woru re , rawoka makpesiay Yesus re honona pa rakot la , La'pa amakokan nohora rira ya'ana-yemannu de hota ta'en niana amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Amhi ' emkade hota edon naplola .
Therefore , select from among you , brothers , seven men of good report , full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom , whom we may appoint over this business . ||| Hade pede mai pia mpialiri-mpialioha riy wo'itu la ' miy , la ' riy maka edonna klernan ma'ta nan yata , me riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la , pa ratu rwarora-rwalai samomuou totpena amtutga pa nhi'inde rwahora liolla riy honona .
But we will continue steadfastly in prayer and in the ministry of the word . ||| Yoma am di de msumbaini , me makot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu nmeh ' a .
These words pleased the whole multitude . They chose Stephen , a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit , Philip , Prochorus , Nicanor , Timon , Parmenas , and Nicolaus , a proselyte of Antioch , ||| Honona re rwayow la hya ' maka ha rakota re . Noma rwaliria Stefanus , riy maka pesiayni narur mieman la Yesus , ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la . Rwet walia Pilipsu , Prokorus , Nikanor , Timon , Parmenas , me Nikolaus mak kwatiawua Antiokia mere riy Yahudi atia ' a de , mere nla oleka Yahudi agamni .
whom they set before the apostles . When they had prayed , they laid their hands on them . ||| Riy mandiditu re , rodia la makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu , noma rsumbainia pa rwaka Orgahi-Orha ' a pa Nala ruri-lai lia ira kniarni ralamni .
The word of God increased and the number of the disciples greatly multiplied in Jerusalem . A great company of the priests were obedient to the faith . ||| Emkadella Uplerlawna lirni nwewar la meni-meni , ne mak klernohora mana ra'ititar rer lia ' Yerusalem . Ne imam-imam liawanni mana , rpesiay Yesus wali , me rlernohor E wniatutnu .
Stephen , full of faith and power , performed great wonders and signs among the people . ||| Uplerlawna Nala rurni-laini la Stefanus pede Stefanus nodi plolli pa nhi ' neka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , pede riy ema rtaplelleltarga .
But some of those who were of the synagogue called The Libertines , and of the Cyrenians , of the Alexandrians , and of those of Cilicia and Asia arose , disputing with Stephen . ||| Mere riy mak kden la hande dom mana rora Stefanus rawahla lira . Ir de nhi'inde rhi ' a krei lia riy maka klergot olek la ata-wa'ara geni , de kreini-iskolli , de riy Yahudi mak kwatiawua Kirene , me Aleksandaria , ror wutga Yahudi mak kwatiawua Kilikia , me Asia .
They were n't able to withstand the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Napre'et nurnu , me Nwaran namni la lir marna pede riy re taken niana rala Stefanus la yawa .
Then they secretly induced men to say , We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God . ||| La ' hade pede rtot wunwunamnu pa ra'hira riy ida-woru , pa rakot nohora Stefanus la mutlialawna gaini riwra , Amatlina , de riy de , napolu-naliella Musa nora Uplerlawna .
They stirred up the people , the elders , and the scribes , and came against him and seized him , then brought him in to the council , ||| La ' emkadella rodia nur lia riy rahu , rora Yahudi in letni-am letni me makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama Yahudi rla rtorna Stefanus , pa rodia la o'ta-mata mak ktorna agama watghudni .
and set up false witnesses who said , This man never stops speaking blasphemous words against this holy place and the law . ||| Me rpol wualia mak ktutrier niohora re saksi pa rla ' walia mak ktorna agama watghudni de totpena rodia lira wotwotar la Stefanus . Mak ktutrier niohora re rwohora Stefanus riwra , Riy di inhatta , mak edon nrena la yapolu-yaliella Uplerlawna roma kreini nora Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni maka Musa nakota .
For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place , and will change the customs which Moses delivered to us . ||| Yoma niwra , Hota Yesus riy Nasaret de , Nalitria Uplerlawna roma kreini dilla yawa , ne Nherun doinia deulu-tatra maka Musa nalerun targa la mai ita .
All who sat in the council , fastening their eyes on him , saw his face like it was the face of an angel . ||| Riy honona mak kawok tar lia re rakillia Stefanus . Ne la ' ler de de , Stefanus gaini yamkekni emeka Uplerlawna lili'irnu-hopopanni gaini .
The high priest said , Are these things so ? ||| Noma imam lawna natiana Stefanus , Stefanus , hya ' maka ha rakota re raplola me rhala ?
He said , Brothers and fathers , listen . The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia , before he lived in Haran , ||| Stefanus nwalolla niwra , Ina-ama ama-hyali , o'ta-mata hononmi . Awuaka lilili-mamuau pua mtiulan pa mitlina hya ' mak a'ukota ri . La ' a lerni la it upni-tgarni Abraham edonna ntawu pua la ' ma'ta leta Haran , de Uplerlawna mak kdella tutullu-lolo'oni Nma Nakot la e ' la ' Mesopotamia liewnu Niwra ,
and said to him , ‘ Get out of your land and away from your relatives , and come into a land which I will show you . ' ||| Abrama ! Mliergot la letmu-ruhunmu , multar wualia inmu-narmu . La mliaun la riy ornoha maka hota Atiutga tiy o ' a .
Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans and lived in Haran . From there , when his father was dead , God moved him into this land where you are now living . ||| Noma Abraham nran lakni la Kasdim yapatni la Mesopotamia pa nwatitin la Haran . La'pa Abraham amni nmat nioma , Uplerlawna Nhopan pa Abrahama nla ' a Israel yapatni di , maka ina-nara , o'ta-mata miy hononmi e mhiol lia di .
He gave him no inheritance in it , no , not so much as to set his foot on . He promised that he would give it to him for a possession , and to his offspring after him , when he still had no child . ||| La ' ler de de , nohanna oke ' mana Uplerlawna edonna Nala la Abrahama nwamueh ' a . Mere Uplerlawna Enakot targa , Hota la ' tan di , de Agala la omuora duratmu-waitmu . Mere la ' ler de Abraham nakleh ma't a'na .
God spoke in this way , that his offspring would live as aliens in a strange land , and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four hundred years . ||| Noma Uplerlawna Nakot emkadilla e ' a , Hota o duratmu-waitmu rden la noha id de , emekneka riy mak klaunu pa rahulti-rahamra . La ' a noh de mniotni , hota rodi plolli la ira , me rhopna-rli'iru , de edonna ral liwatnu-odawni yawahlani ne rnahora-rnala ' a re , pa nahor tuw niana anni rahu wogata .
‘ I will judge the nation to which they will be in bondage , ' said God , ‘ and after that they will come out and serve me in this place . ' ||| Mere hota Agukmua hairi mak kwa'ata-kwa'ara hare . Ne hota irlergot la gen die pa rma rkola tieru-rawur nehla la A ' u mai handi .
He gave him the covenant of circumcision . So Abraham became the father of Isaac , and circumcised him the eighth day . Isaac became the father of Jacob , and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs . ||| La'pa Nakot emkade noma rhi ' nana kniohlima la ' a nnio'oni id la Abraham , de sunat . La'pa rayoria Isak wa dewade nmai pia lerni wo'awni na'nama Abraham nsunta . La'pa la la ' lolol wa de Isak nsunta a'nani Yakop . Ne Yakop nsunta a'nani termida wehrani woru re , maka rweta la riy mak kadurit nana Yahudi mut riwnu-halli .
The patriarchs , moved with jealousy against Joseph , sold him into Egypt . God was with him ||| Mak kadurit nana ita re , ralamni mehra la garni Yusup noma ra'olga . La'pa riy rwa'ata-rwa'ara la Mesir , mere Uplerlawna edonna Nolin lima-nwe'er ror la Yusup .
and delivered him out of all his afflictions , and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh , king of Egypt . He made him governor over Egypt and all his house . ||| Ne Nwe'er doinia la wutwutnu-kokgohonu . Uplerlawna Ntutrier lia reranni kiorni-matni rletni , pa la'pa maka yade ' la rai gerni mana nayamkek la , me mak kagaur la hletan lawna mana nakwiet nana . Hade pede marna ornoha-wuhur orrai Firaun ralam kalwiedni la , pede ntut lia matni-nkew la ra'ani pa nla o'ta-mata id la Mesir , ne nodi plolli la ray Firaun atni-wa'arni nor wutga likatni nora mniotni honona .
Now a famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan , and great affliction . Our fathers found no food . ||| Nhorwua noma Mesira liewnu me nwewar walia Kana'an uhunu-ewatni de rehka-lar matmiati . It upni-tgarni yamananni nhorwua ,
But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt , he sent out our fathers the first time . ||| pede la'pa ratlin de metma gandum etla Mesir , noma Yakop nhopan doinia a'nani , it upni-tgarni re , rla rawelia hande .
On the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers , and Joseph 's family was revealed to Pharaoh . ||| La'pa rawali owa'an la re'eni wornu , dewade Yusup ntutga rupni la hyalli re . Noma Firaun na'nama natga la Yusup hyalli er walia .
Joseph sent and summoned Jacob his father and all his relatives , seventy-five souls . ||| Noma Yusup na'enyat kot la amni Yakop , de niwra e ' e nmormior mia'ta pa plet pa amni nora upni-a'nani , me duratni-waitni honona mak kden la Kana'an de rla ' nek wa la ' a Mesir . Yakop nora upni-a'nani honona re , de riy terampwo'itu wehrani wolima .
Jacob went down into Egypt and he died , himself and our fathers , ||| Noma it upni-tgarni Yakop nor upni-a'nani rwatitin la Mesir , noma name'eta-na'anin lol wa , la la'pa lerni la Yakop nora it upni-tgarni rmat lia hande .
and they were brought back to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver from the children of Hamor of Shechem . ||| Mere rodia pa rkenia la liena la Sikhem , la ' a tniamin mat geni maka Abraham nawel niana la Hemor upni-a'nani mak kden la Sikhem .
But as the time of the promise came close which God had sworn to Abraham , the people grew and multiplied in Egypt , ||| La'pa nhi'pa nwakriania lerni maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la ' a Abraham , de Yakop Israel upni-a'nani na'ititar rer lia liawanni .
until there arose a different king who did n't know Joseph . ||| La'pa nmai wia hohoni de , dewade ray miaka edonna nat niohor ma'ta Yusup nhernu-nwau pua ntorna Mesir .
The same took advantage of our race and mistreated our fathers , and forced them to abandon their babies , so that they would n't stay alive . ||| La ' ray die kniukamnu-tnio'mani de , ntot Yahudi re la klieratni . Enahora-nala ' a it upni-tgarni , de nhopan pa it upni-tgarni re rhopliala papay mak na'nama ha rmor niana re la gera ralamni totpena rmati .
At that time Moses was born , and was exceedingly handsome to God . He was nourished three months in his father 's house . ||| La'pa nla'awa la ' ler de , dewade rayoria Musa . Ne Uplerlawna ralamni Nal e ' a . Noka Musa wolanni wotel lia amni limni ralamni .
When he was abandoned , Pharaoh 's daughter took him up and reared him as her own son . ||| La'pa ta'en niana rlahu nana noma rla ranera , noka Firaun a'nani patke ' a nlernana pa nhi ' a la a'nani .
Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians . He was mighty in his words and works . ||| Nhioli lieta-ilu wniehwa , lira-yatu krei-iskola hairi Mesir , de Musa nwatut lia rpa nat momuou honona . Me nhar lir maranni de watu poka-pah ' a , ne nodi plolli pa nhi ' hya'-hya ' to'owa .
But when he was forty years old , it came into his heart to visit his brothers , the children of Israel . ||| La'pa Musa tuwnu anni terampwogata dewade ralma-riorni nko ' i nana wniatroma la e nohwalli Israel mak kdella Mesira .
Seeing one of them suffer wrong , he defended him and avenged him who was oppressed , striking the Egyptian . ||| Noma nhor tut niana plollola e nohwalli ida , de makden Mesir ida nahora-nala ' a . Noma Musa nahankeran pa nwenna riy Mesir de , yoma nod niana e nohwalli de .
He supposed that his brothers understood that God , by his hand , was giving them deliverance , but they did n't understand . ||| La ' a Musa wniarorni de , hota nohwalli re rat niohora , de Uplerlawna yala'ani la mak emkade totpena , e ' ed mak kolin doini nohwalli re la wutwutu-kokgohu . Mere Musa hihi'ini-yapyapni de , hamamuamua la nohwalli re wniarorni-wnialaini .
The day following , he appeared to them as they fought , and urged them to be at peace again , saying , ‘ Sirs , you are brothers . Why do you wrong one another ? ' ||| Repar dewade , Musa namkek nan owa'ana e nohwalli Israel woru rtepartarlia yawenna . Noma Musa nwaduran pa nla npolliohor rrora totpena rkalwieda . Musa nakot la re , Hei , mimrio ' de , riy id nor hyalli . Hya ' a nrei pia mrio ' miwo'ora ? !
But he who did his neighbor wrong pushed him away , saying , ‘ Who made you a ruler and a judge over us ? ||| Mere riy mak kohma mutwualli ida notil doinia Mus la ' wali , na'nama nakot la Musa , Oi ! He ' ed maka kran o ' la o'tani pa omuodi plolli me mpuolliohor ami ? !
Do you want to kill me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday ? ' ||| Yanhi'pa omiwra mpunu-mpuenan owa'an a lia dodo'ondi , pa emekwalia wonyira ompuenna riy Mesir dena ?
Moses fled at this saying , and became a stranger in the land of Midian , where he became the father of two sons . ||| La'pa Musa natlin nana hya ' maka ha nakota de , dewade Musa nawlar lia Mesir pa nla'awa Midian yapatni . Nden nek la hande emekneka riy mak klaunu , pa nahulti-nahamra pa nmehlima , ne nlernana a'na riy woru .
When forty years were fulfilled , an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai , in a flame of fire in a bush . ||| La'awa anni terampwogat wa dewade Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu ida nmaiya Musa la wo'orletna-kawurloini mak rehgorgorga wo'or Sinai . Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu de , nden la ai mormiori ralamni , de ai miormiori miak kden la ahla ralamni .
When Moses saw it , he wondered at the sight . As he came close to see , the voice of the Lord came to him , ||| Musa ema rtaplelleltarga pa namkeka hade . Noma nla nwakriania totpena namkek kalwiedweda hade de hya ' a de . Edon nalo'on wali ne , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhar lirni la Niwra ,
‘ I am the God of your fathers , the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . ' Moses trembled and dared not look . ||| Uplerlawanmu A ' g inhatti ! Upmu-tgarmu Abraham , Isaka , Yakopa Uplerlawanni A ' u . Musa natlin hade , dewade mtatande nekpa ndiwra-nda'ala genni , pa nahmena namkek la Uplerlawna mak kden la ahla mak ai ha na'an la ralamni de .
The Lord said to him , ‘ Take off your sandals , for the place where you stand is holy ground . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhari owa'an lirni , Muo'lu dioinia lakmu wniowni della . Yoma gen miaka omuprir lia de , Uplerlawna mounu-wahrani etla hande .
I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt , and have heard their groaning . I have come down to deliver them . Now come , I will send you into Egypt . ' ||| A ' g umkek reria u'pu-a'nu makdena Mesir e rlului-rnurnuhru nohora yamukni-yama'alli . Utlin oleka polpuollu-wakwakni , pede Agerun la heyanan pa Agolin doin ir la wutwutu-kokgohu . Mai pia omlia muwal lia Mesir la dodo'ondi memna .
This Moses whom they refused , saying , ‘ Who made you a ruler and a judge ? '-God has sent him as both a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush . ||| Ama-hyal miy re , mitlina . Mus di , riy Israel re edonna rtelan nana-raut nana oleka la ' ler maka riy maroro ' a re rawo'ora , ne rwayotlia pa rakot la , Oi ! He ' ed maka kran o ' la o'tani pa omuodi plolli me mpuolliohor ami ? ! Mere la ' e ' nanpena Uplerlawna Ntutga rupni emeka E hopopanni-lili'irnu mak kden la ruwnu-ahla maka ai ha nmormior lia , pa Nhopna e nla ' o'tani me namori-nalewna .
This man led them out , having worked wonders and signs in Egypt , in the Red Sea , and in the wilderness for forty years . ||| Mus de , ed mak kla o'tani pa nodgiota hairi Israel pa rlergot la Mesir me nhi ' to ' a hihi'ini-yapyapni mak riy edonna ramkek taru mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , nhi'nande riy ema rtaplelleltarga la Mesir , me la Hletan Mermera , ne la ' walia wo'orletna-kawurloini , pa nalo'on nana anni terampwogata .
This is that Moses who said to the children of Israel , ‘ The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers , like me . ' ||| Mus wal pia ed mak kakot la hairi Israel niwra , Hota Uplerlawna Nal owa'ana riy id tiy miy , de makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka ha rwalir niana la miy orgahami emekwalia Uplerlawna Nwalir niana a ' di .
This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai , and with our fathers , who received living revelations to give to us , ||| Musa nanpena ed mak kora hairi Israel re la'pa rawoka la wo'orletna-kawurloini ne mak kor Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu rwahauru la wo'or Sinai . Nhor nioka Musa nakot E lirni la it upni-tgarni re wali . E ' ed mak Uplerlawna Nala kot mak kodia mormiori-dardiari pa enakota mai ita .
to whom our fathers would n't be obedient , but rejected him and turned back in their hearts to Egypt , ||| La ' emkade ho'mana it upni-tgarni re edonna rtelan nana-raut nana Musa lirni-tunnu . Rwayotil Musa , ne riwra rawal lia Mesir .
saying to Aaron , ‘ Make us gods that will go before us , for as for this Moses who led us out of the land of Egypt , we do n't know what has become of him . ' ||| Hade pede rakot la Harun , Haruna , mukoki-muyapi nieka uplera-upmati marna-ornoha mai ami , totpena amkolla pa nmeh ' a nodi ami . Yoma amaplin niohora de , Mus de mak kodi am pia mlergot la Mesir , de etla walli meni .
They made a calf in those days , and brought a sacrifice to the idol , and rejoiced in the works of their hands . ||| La ' hade pede rna'ona la rhi ' a uplera-upmati ida , de rtot nohora sapi a'na pa nhi'inde rodia nhioi-tniani la . Ne ramuki-rahepur nohora ir limni enni de .
But God turned away and gave them up to serve the army of the sky , as it is written in the book of the prophets , ‘ Did you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness , O house of Israel ? ||| Noma Uplerlawna Nhur dioinia rpa Nhoitio'or la re , pa rwatniar la heyanan pa rpol lia wunu-rwak la lera . La ' hade de , plol meman la maka ha rhorat targa la makwohorulu-ktatrulu pukni ralamni de emkadille , Oi Israel miy re ! Miy mkiok pipi-mriotan duma , me mhioi-mtiania la anni terampwogata mak ha mdiella wo'orletna-kawurloini de , mere edonna mial hare mai A ' u .
You took up the tabernacle of Moloch , the star of your god Rephan , the figures which you made to worship , so I will carry you away beyond Babylon . ' ||| Rom ku ' a kemah atiehra mak kwawa Moloka ed maka miodia pa mimniair de , nor wutga atiehra wtiona , de uplermu mak kwaw Refan . Miy mieh ' a neka mhi ' hare totpena mhioi-mtiania . La hade pede hota Agolin doin miy lia pa arwalmi rod miy lia gen olietlet memna la Babel .
Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness , even as he who spoke to Moses commanded him to make it according to the pattern that he had seen , ||| Uplerlawna romni Kemah maka nhi'inde Uplerlawna Nlola pa Nmai lia it upni-tgarni , de Kemah mak kden la wo'orletna-kawurloini . Uplerlawna Nhopna Musa nariria Kemah de , de nlernohora hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a me Ntutg olek la Musa pa Musa nod niohora .
which also our fathers , in their turn , brought in with Joshua when they entered into the possession of the nations whom God drove out before the face of our fathers to the days of David , ||| Nhorwua noma it upni-tgarni rodia Kemah de pa rlol meni-meni to ' a pa la ' lerni la it upni-tgarni rora Yosua de , rod nieka de la ' pa rwarui niana it nohoni di , la ' a hairi-hairi maka Uplerlawna Ndi'na-nlo'wa la ir gaini ralamni . Kemah de nden nek la pa , mai pia Daud tuwnu nlernana .
who found favor in the sight of God , and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob . ||| Uplerlawna ralamni nala Daud , pede Daud nwak la Uplerlawna totpena enhi ' walia roma-krei id la Uplerlawna maka Yakop nor upni-tgarni ha rkola tieru-rawur nehla la de .
But Solomon built him a house . ||| Mere Salomo ed mak kariria roma-krei die .
However , the Most High does n't dwell in temples made with hands , as the prophet says , ||| Mere Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni edonna Nhol lia rom maka rimormiori rhi ' nana yoma la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni la ' a Puka ralamni niwra ,
‘ heaven is my throne , and the earth a footstool for my feet . What kind of house will you build me ? ' says the Lord . ‘ Or what is the place of my rest ? ||| Uplerlawna lirni nekane emkadilla , A liwange'nu de nawniau lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha , ne A lia'aru de nhapar reria noh marna . Ne hya ' rom ed maka miwra miriria mai A ' u ? ! Hota la ' gen mieni ed mak Adien la ? !
Did n't my hand make all these things ? ' ||| Miplinga de , Amueh ' a ed mak kakoki-kayap niana penpuenu-tetema rina ? !
You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears , you always resist the Holy Spirit ! As your fathers did , so you do . ||| Oi ! O'ta tehra-tlinnon kerna etla ' miy , hota taken niana mitlina-mitailia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Uplerlawna Nhar lirni mere tlinmi rahniodla pitu . Mikot oleka miwra a ' di mak kapolu-kaliella kwohora-kweyata Uplerlawna roma kreini me Musa deullu-tatarni . Mere hota miy mieh ' a miora upmi-tgarmi mlia ' a lir ida , pa edon mitlin la Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
Which of the prophets did n't your fathers persecute ? They killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One , of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers . ||| Miy upmi-tgarmi rhi ' yatyat la makwohorulu-ktatrulu honona mak kmai re . Hare mana rwen oleka maka Uplerlawna Nhopan pa rma rakot nohora la ' a hota Uplerlawna Hopopanni Ploloi-Plele'era ida Nmai . Mere la'pa Nmai wia noma miy miala la makden Yahudi atia ' a pa mpienna .
You received the law as it was ordained by angels , and did n't keep it ! ||| Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu rma rakot oleka la ' a deulu-tatra maka Uplerlawna Nakota-nalde'et taru , mere miy edonna mliernohora honona re .
Now when they heard these things , they were cut to the heart , and they gnashed at him with their teeth . ||| La'pa o'ta-mata mak ktorna agama watghudni re ratlin targa hya ' maka Stefanus nakotkota re edonna rla ' nana ir ralamni , dewade rahankeran doin la pa rhoktemna Stefanus .
But he , being full of the Holy Spirit , looked up steadfastly into heaven and saw the glory of God , and Jesus standing on the right hand of God , ||| Mere Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la Stefanus pa nwatniar la lyanti , ne namkek de de hititni-repreparni nle'lu reria Uplerlawna , ne Yesus Naprir rier lia gen tiutulu la ' a Uplerlawna walli malganna .
and said , Behold , I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God ! ||| Mimkek ee ! A ' g umkeka Ilyamou-Watyatoha ema rhar dioinia , me Rimormiori A'nani de Ntutrier lia Uplerlawna walli malganna .
But they cried out with a loud voice and stopped their ears , then rushed at him with one accord . ||| O'ta-mata re ral okarni ra rhodla tlinni na'nama polpuolu-hawaunia , rhaul temna pa rtorna Stefanus .
They threw him out of the city and stoned him . The witnesses placed their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul . ||| Rte'la la Stefanus pa rnunia la letlawna to'orni , na'nama ral watu ra rwatliewria . Riy maka dodo'ona rtutrier niohora pa rodia lira wotwotar la Stefanus la o'ta-mata re , ro'lu ir rain plalahwani , pa rala la tuwari ida namkek rer lia . Tuwar die nanni de Saulus .
They stoned Stephen as he called out , saying , Lord Jesus , receive my spirit ! ||| Ertepartarlia Stefanus wniatliewurnu mere Stefanus npol lia Yesus , Orgahi-Orha ' a nee ! Yesus e ! Mhuoi limmu pa Muala a arnu .
He kneeled down and cried with a loud voice , Lord , do n't hold this sin against them ! When he had said this , he fell asleep . ||| Noma nwaltior pa nhaun la Orgahi-Orha ' a niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a nee , yana Mpuahla mak khi ' a ' u ri do'oni-halli . La'pa nakot emkade dewade nwaran doini aranni .
Saul was consenting to his death . A great persecution arose against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that day . They were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria , except for the apostles . ||| Saulus mana nwayow nohora Stefanus wnienanni . Ler de de rna'ulga yamuki-yama'al lawna la makpesiay Yesus la ' Yerusalem . Ir honona re'era-rhakra la Yudea nora Samaria liewnu enekneka mak Yesus Nhopan pa rodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re , de edonna re'era-rhakra .
Devout men buried Stephen and lamented greatly over him . ||| Mere riy mak ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna re , rtamnia Stefanus inonni , ne rapolu-ratnian niohora matmiatni .
But Saul ravaged the assembly , entering into every house and dragged both men and women off to prison . ||| Mere Saulus ntot la ' a-ntot mai pia nnahora-nnala ' a makpesiay Yesus re , ne ntawu roma id pa nokur korni re ni'ita-nnunia patke ' a ror muanke ' a , nodgiota pa nma nala rpa rkenia la nhio'la geni-wnienat geni ralamni .
Therefore those who were scattered abroad went around preaching the word . ||| Noma maka ha re'era-rhakra re , rala ' doin noh de uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani pa rod kiota-ral de'et nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Yesus .
Philip went down to the city of Samaria and proclaimed to them the Christ . ||| Noma makpesiay Yesusa id de nwawa Pilipsu , nla'awa leta id la Samaria pa nod kiota-nal de'et nohora Ray mak Uplerlawna Nano'taru pua Namori-nalewna rimormiori la ' mak kden hande .
The multitudes listened with one accord to the things that were spoken by Philip when they heard and saw the signs which he did . ||| La'pa riy rahu re ratlin nana Pilipsu wniahaurnu , me ramkek nohora mak ha nhi ' nana re , de hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini , dewade honona ral ralam tetema rreiniana-ra'nana hya ' maka ha nakot nohora re .
For unclean spirits came out of many of those who had them . They came out , crying with a loud voice . Many who had been paralyzed and lame were healed . ||| Yoma la ' a riy rahu mak yatni-rha'ani , hegana-kawnu rhu'ru ralma rde , yatni-rha'ani , hegana-kawnu re ema ratargota , de polpuolu-hawaun memna re , ne mak kaliu'uta re liawanni , mak ktu ' u-kwaini re rkalwieda .
There was great joy in that city . ||| Hade pede la ' let de ralamni de muki-hepru nmeh ' a nniata .
But there was a certain man , Simon by name , who used to practice sorcery in the city and amazed the people of Samaria , making himself out to be some great one , ||| Noma riy ida nwawa Simona , mahneka meman pa nhi ' ukru-rehera la ' let de , pa nhi ' a Samaria liewnu de , mniotni pa rhe'du hmuakmuakru . Simon di natulu-napetna inonni pa niwra , A ' di de , riy mak kla ' orkotkotni-ornananni .
to whom they all listened , from the least to the greatest , saying , This man is that great power of God . ||| Riy honona , kuku'uni-lalawanni rlernohora ne riwra , Riy di de , Uplerlawna rurni-laini maka riy ratga de Rurliawna-Lailiawna .
They listened to him because for a long time he had amazed them with his sorceries . ||| Ne rlernohor reria , yoma mahnek memna , nala ukru-rieherni na nahed wuenna re .
But when they believed Philip preaching good news concerning God 's Kingdom and the name of Jesus Christ , they were baptized , both men and women . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de , ir rpesiaya Pilipsu , mak nakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni , la ' Uplerlawna Nodi plolli emeka Ray , ne nakot wal lia Yesus de Ray Makamori-Kalewna mak Uplerlawna Nano'taru , dewade patke ' a rora muanke ' a rala inonni pa rharania .
Simon himself also believed . Being baptized , he continued with Philip . Seeing signs and great miracles occurring , he was amazed . ||| Simona nmeh ' a nek de npesiaya , ne la'pa rharan dioinia , dewade nor mamaini Pilipsu talla , ne ema nhed wenna la'pa namkek nana Pilipsu hihi'ini-yapyapni maka riy edon ramkek taru , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini .
Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God , they sent Peter and John to them , ||| La'pa makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni mak kdella Yerusalem ratlin nana de makden Samaria rreinian oleka Uplerlawna lirni , dewade ir rwahor nana Petrus nor Yohansi pa rla ' hande .
who , when they had come down , prayed for them , that they might receive the Holy Spirit , ||| Noka rla'awa . La'pa rte'ela hande dewade , irrora rsumbain la Uplerlawna riwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , ler di ampolu-mpak la O ' a totpa makden Samaria ri rlernana Nhiw Lululmu .
for as yet he had fallen on none of them . They had only been baptized in the name of Christ Jesus . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli edon Nerun ma'ta la riy id la ir mutnu , rharan tio ' ir la Itmatromni Yesus nanni wawannu .
Then they laid their hands on them , and they received the Holy Spirit . ||| Nhor nioka rrora rran limni pa rlapra la hare wuwannu , noka rlernana Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles ' hands , he offered them money , ||| La'pa Simon namkek de rlernana Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , onnila makod Uplerlawna lirni re rran limni , nwatania kupanni la ira ,
saying , Give me also this power , that whomever I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit . ||| ne niwra , Ama , mial wali ruri-lai die mai a ' u , totpa la'pa arian li'mu pa kuowa la he'-he ' wuwannu , de nlernana walia Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
But Peter said to him , May your silver perish with you , because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money ! ||| Mere Petrus nakot la niwra , Hoi ! Rrinin wutga omuora kupanmu de la ai mormiori ralamni binasa , yoma wniarormu de , de hota mual kupanmu muwel nian walia rurni-laini , pa mrian limmu la he'-he ' wuwannu de nlernana Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
You have neither part nor lot in this matter , for your heart is n't right before God . ||| O ' edonna muor wutga am lia riora ida pa muala Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli la riy , yoma ralammu edonna naploi-naple'er la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Repent therefore of this , your wickedness , and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may be forgiven you . ||| Dodo'ondi mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omu-halmu dilla , ne mpuolu-mpuak la Orgahi-Orha ' a , totpa matialo'onama Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'omu-halmu onnila ralma-riormu de .
For I see that you are in the poison of bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity . ||| Yoma agatga , de ralammu namehra rehi iri hati emolmolla eru mernu , ne ralammu nawniotar la do ' a-hala ralamni .
Simon answered , Pray for me to the Lord , that none of the things which you have spoken happen to me . ||| Simona nwahla , Emkade de , mpuolu-mpuak la Orgahi-Orha ' a mai a ' u , totpa yana amuat pia alier la ai mormiori ralamni , ne hota a kupnu nhorwua .
They therefore , when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord , returned to Jerusalem , and preached the Good News to many villages of the Samaritans . ||| Noma la'pa Petrusa me Yohansi rwair la yodkiota-yalde'et nohora Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni , dewade ir rawal lia Yerusalema , ne la ' a ir lala'ani de , de ir rod kiota-ral de'et nohora Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni-paitiotni la ' a leta-ruhun liawanni no ' a Samaria .
Then an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip , saying , Arise , and go toward the south to the way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza . This is a desert . ||| Nhor nioka Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat ida nakot la Pilipsu niwra , Pilips ee ! Mumat pa mpuaran pa muokru tranna , mliernohora talan mak kerun la Yerusalem pa nokru Gasa . Talan de talan mak kdella wo'ora-kawru .
He arose and went , and behold , there was a man of Ethiopia , a eunuch of great authority under Candace , queen of the Ethiopians , who was over all her treasure , who had come to Jerusalem to worship . ||| Hade pede Pilipsu nwaran wa . La ' a talan letgara nwatroma makden Etiopia ida , riy lalawna , makhi ' o'ta la Sri Kandake , Etiopia Ratnu kupna-kaini . Riy de nla'aw Yerusalem pa nla nkola tieru-nawur nehla la Uplerlawna la hande , demade nawali owa'ana .
He was returning and sitting in his chariot , and was reading the prophet Isaiah . ||| La'pa riy de etla yala'ani ralamni pa nawal wia , ne namtatan reria la keretni ralamni , de e npaikpiaik rieria makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya pukni .
The Spirit said to Philip , Go near , and join yourself to this chariot . ||| Noka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot la Pilipsu , Pilipsia , mlia ' hande pa mriehgorga keret de onni .
Philip ran to him , and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet , and said , Do you understand what you are reading ? ||| Pilipsu plet-plet pa nla'awa hande ne natlin de o'ta-mat de e nteparla pniaiki makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya pukni . Pilipsu nakot la , Tuna , omnia'erat nana hya ' mak ha mpuaik dena ?
He said , How can I , unless someone explains it to me ? He begged Philip to come up and sit with him . ||| Nwahla , Hyalia , emkameni pa ania'erit nana , la'pa riy edon re'er nohora mai a ' u ? ! Noka nwak pa Pilipsu nha'at la heyanna me namtatan la onni .
Now the passage of the Scripture which he was reading was this , He was led as a sheep to the slaughter . As a lamb before his shearer is silent , so he does n't open his mouth . ||| Lir maka ha npaik de , emkadille , E ' de emolmolla duma id mak ha rodia la riotan geni , ne emeka dum a'na mak kakleh lir la ' a mak ktori wullu gaini , emkade wal lia E ' a , edonna Nhar lirni .
In his humiliation , his judgment was taken away . Who will declare His generation ? For his life is taken from the earth . ||| Riy rhi ' amola-ma ' a E ' a . Emeka E ' de erierannu-padpa'danni id E ' a la niukamnu , nalla ' wawannu de mak edon naplola . Ne riy id mana edon nwahaur nohora duratni-waitni yoma rwatul doini olek aranni mai noh di wawannu la ' a lera edon na'upa-na ' a'na ma'ta .
The eunuch answered Philip , Who is the prophet talking about ? About himself , or about someone else ? ||| Noma o'ta-mat de nakot la Pilipsu , Hyalia , A'utian tek o ' a , makwohorulu-ktatrulu die ha nakot nohor he ' a pede emkadena ? Nakot nohor inon wamueheni me nakot nohor riy dom to ' a ?
Philip opened his mouth , and beginning from this Scripture , preached to him about Jesus . ||| Noma Pilipsu nhar lirni nnairia Puka lirni dilla , pa nwahaur nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Yesusa lirni-tunnu honona .
As they went on the way , they came to some water , and the eunuch said , Behold , here is water . What is keeping me from being baptized ? ||| Ira rhaur la yala'ani re , ne rte'ela geni id maka gera etla . Noka o'ta-mat de nakot la , Ee mumkeka , la ' hande de gera ette , ne hya ' owa'an ed mak khi ' oruli-augewat pa edonna mhuarania a ' u ? !
He commanded the chariot to stand still , and they both went down into the water , both Philip and the eunuch , and he baptized him . ||| Noka o'ta-mat de nhopan pa ratutga keret de , ne irrora rerun la gera ralamni , Pilipsu me o'ta-mat de rewre'wa , ne Pilipsu nharania wa .
When they came up out of the water , the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away , and the eunuch did n't see him any more , for he went on his way rejoicing . ||| Ne la'pa ir rwatulgot la gera ralamni pa rha'at la heyanna , plinu-plinniana Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhiw Lululli Natiarmua Pilipsu pa emek nwatlena , ne o'ta-mat de edon namkek nana owa'an wa . Mere o'ta-mat de nala ' doini yala'ani , de nahepuepur reri .
But Philip was found at Azotus . Passing through , he preached the Good News to all the cities until he came to Caesarea . ||| Mere la ' de Pilipsu etla Asdod . Dewade Pilipsu nala ' etia yapatni de , ne nod kiota-nal de'et nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni la leta-leta re honona , nodia pa la ntut lia Kaisarea
But Saul , still breathing threats and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord , went to the high priest ||| La ' ler de , Saulus nakot mamain de niwra nwunu-nwenna makpesiay Itmatromni Yesus re . Noka e nla nhar lirni-ngot gai lia imam lawna ,
and asked for letters from him to the synagogues of Damascus , that if he found any who were of the Way , whether men or women , he might bring them bound to Jerusalem . ||| ne nwaka horta mak ha rtapla hiwliai rurni-laini la e ' pa nodia la o'ta-mata la roma-lewu maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la leta Damsik , totpa la'pa nwatrom nana he'-he ' mak klernohora Yesus talanni , de ntorna rpa nodia la Yerusalem .
As he traveled , he got close to Damascus , and suddenly a light from the sky shone around him . ||| Ne la'pa nharan rer mia'ta let Damsik pa niwa nwakrian wa , dewade plinu-plinniana tlena ida nwatiawu lyanti nlair nana Saulus .
He fell on the earth , and heard a voice saying to him , Saul , Saul , why do you persecute me ? ||| Napru'wu la tani wawannu ne , natlin nana lira ida nakot la , Saulus , Saulus ee ! Hya ' nrei pia omumuki-muma'al A ' u ? !
He said , Who are you , Lord ? The Lord said , I am Jesus , whom you are persecuting . ||| Saulus nwahla , He ' O ' a Matrome ? Niwra , A ' di de Yesus , mak omumuki-muma'al de .
But rise up and enter into the city , then you will be told what you must do . ||| Mere omumat meman la dodo'ondi , ne mlia'awa la ' leta ralamni , la ' hande hota rakot tiy o ' pa omhi ' hya ' a .
The men who traveled with him stood speechless , hearing the sound , but seeing no one . ||| Noma talanwalli mak ktutrieri re , ema rtaplelleltarga re , yoma plola pa ratlin nana lir de , mere edon ramkeka riy id wali .
Saul arose from the ground , and when his eyes were opened , he saw no one . They led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus . ||| Saulus mana namat pa ntutrieri , noka nwer matni , mere edon namkek nana hadomdoma . Pede ira rnaheman nana pa ralakra la ' a leta Damsik ralamni .
He was without sight for three days , and neither ate nor drank . ||| Nalo'on nan lera wotel die edon namkek eti , ne edon na'ana-nemnu wali .
Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias . The Lord said to him in a vision , Ananias ! He said , Behold , it 's me , Lord . ||| La ' Damsik de , riy id makpesiay Yesus etla , nwawa Ananias . Ananias di ndarat nana lira ida , de Itmatromni Niwra , Ananias ! Nwahla niwra , Hya ' Matroma ?
The Lord said to him , Arise and go to the street which is called Straight , and inquire in the house of Judah for one named Saul , a man of Tarsus . For behold , he is praying , ||| Itmatromni lirni , Oi ! Plet pa mlia'awa diwa . Muodi liarmu la Yudas romni la talla mak kwawa Talan Plele'era . Mutian nan mak kwawa Saulus la ' hande . Riy de ha nwatiawu leta Tarsus . Ne dodo'ondi de ntepartarlia sniumbaini .
and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in and laying his hands on him , that he might receive his sight . ||| Ne e ' mana ndarat nan wali o ' a , de namkek nana riy ida nwawa Ananias nler la rialma ne nlapar limni la wuwannu , totpa e matni naphyari owa'an la genni .
But Ananias answered , Lord , I have heard from many about this man , how much evil he did to your saints at Jerusalem . ||| Mere Ananias namta'at nlernohora Itmatromni lirni pa niwra , Matroma , a'utlina la ' riy rahu rwahauria riy di hihi'ini-yapyapni la yamukni-yama'alli la ' a riy makpesiay O ' la Yerusalem .
Here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name . ||| Ne dodo'ondi e nmai olekwa la handi , de nodia horta mak imam-imam o'tani-matni ha rtapla hiwliai lia , pa nodia totpa na nwatorna riy honona mak ka'uli-kawedia O ' nanmu .
But the Lord said to him , Go your way , for he is my chosen vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings , and the children of Israel . ||| Mere Itmatromlawanni lirni , Mlia'awa , yoma Awualir oleka e ' wa totpena nhima-nre ' a A knia'ru , pa nwahaur lol A lia hairi-hairi korni rora ir rayni me Israel mniotni wali .
For I will show him how many things he must suffer for my name 's sake . ||| Ne hota Amueh ' a nekpa tiutga la ' a liwtu-odwa mehra-mau honona maka e ntutulu-nakwara , onnila A na'nu .
Ananias departed and entered into the house . Laying his hands on him , he said , Brother Saul , the Lord , who appeared to you on the road by which you came , has sent me that you may receive your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit . ||| Noma Ananias nla'awa meman la pa nler la rom de ralamni . Nlapar limni la Saulus wuwannu pa niwra , Saulus , o ' mak dodo'ondi de mpuesiay olek la Yesus , Itmatromni Yesus mak kalhari olek inonni tiy o ' a la talan mak omliola de , ed mak khopn amuai olek di totpa o matmu namkek owa'ana , me Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli tiy o ' a .
Immediately something like scales fell from his eyes , and he received his sight . He arose and was baptized . ||| Mtatande nekpa ha wawahra ida nal doin la Saulus matni , ne matni naphyari owa'an la genni . Noma namat wa pa nhor nioma rharania .
He took food and was strengthened . Saul stayed several days with the disciples who were at Damascus . ||| Ne la'pa na'an pa nhorwua , dewade naruri owa'an la genni . Noma lera ida-woru Saulus ndella leta Damsik nor wutga makpesiaya Yesus .
Immediately in the synagogues he proclaimed the Christ , that he is the Son of God . ||| Ler de meman pa nakot nohora Yesus la roma-lewu miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli la ralamni re , niwra Yesus de , hade de Uplerlawna A'nani Wutmueha-Laimieha .
All who heard him were amazed , and said , Is n't this he who in Jerusalem made havoc of those who called on this name ? And he had come here intending to bring them bound before the chief priests ! ||| Riy honona ema rtaplelleltarga ratlina Saulus , pa idma nakot la ida , Hadi ed mak knahora-knala ' a riy honona makpesiay Yesus la Yerusalem toh ? ! Nhi ' wal pia nmai die totpa ntorna makpesiay Yesus pa rodia la imam-imam o'tani-matni toh ? !
But Saul increased more in strength , and confounded the Jews who lived at Damascus , proving that this is the Christ . ||| Mere Saulus rurni-laini na'ititar rer lia , ne ltierni la ' riy ralamni . Ntutga de plol toto ' a de , Yesus de , Ray mak Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori . Nhi'pede Yahudi makden la Damsik edonna rlernan talan pa rhoklira-rpah ' a waw la .
When many days were fulfilled , the Jews conspired together to kill him , ||| La'pa lera nla ' a-nmai wia dewade , Yahudi o'tani-matni re rna'ohma totpa rwenna Saulus .
but their plot became known to Saul . They watched the gates both day and night that they might kill him , ||| Mere wniarora-wnialai di naphyar lia Saulus . Lelera-melmel de Yahudi mniotni re ratiak apitga leta puohrani re honona , totpa rwenna Saulus .
but his disciples took him by night and let him down through the wall , lowering him in a basket . ||| Mere la ' a mela ida , makpesiay Yesus de rkenia Saulus la lo'ora ralamni pa rhuriernia , lola lutur leta hu'ulli ida .
When Saul had come to Jerusalem , he tried to join himself to the disciples , but they were all afraid of him , not believing that he was a disciple . ||| Noma Saulus nokria Yerusalem . La'pa nte'ela hande wa dewade , Saulus e natekal pa nler wut lia makpesiay Yesus re , mere honona re ramta'at la e ' a , yoma edonna rpesiay mia'ta , de e ' de npesiaya olek Yesus wa .
But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles , and declared to them how he had seen the Lord on the way , and that he had spoken to him , and how at Damascus he had preached boldly in the name of Jesus . ||| Mere hohoni de Barnabas nreinian e ' pa nodia la maka Yesus Nhopan pa rodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni re temanni , ne nwahaur nohor la emkameni la Saulus namkek nana Itmatromni la talan letgara , de Itmatromni Nora raltier wiutu . Barnabas nakot nohor wal lia ira , emkameni la Saulus nparani pa , nla nwatut niohora Yesus la ' a Damsik .
He was with them entering into Jerusalem , ||| Hade pede Saulus nora rpa rden rewre'wa la Yerusalem , ne Saulus nala ' wewewar pa nodia paranni pa nakot nohora Itmatromni Yesus la hande .
preaching boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus . He spoke and disputed against the Hellenists , but they were seeking to kill him . ||| Lerlera e ' mana nora makden Yahudi mak kawala Yunani re rawahla lira , mere ir rahak talan pa rwenna .
When the brothers knew it , they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus . ||| La la'pa riy makpesiay korni ratga de rahak talan pa rwenna Saulus , noma rodia pa rla'awa la Kaisarea . Nhorwua noma rhopan Saulus pa nha'at la kapli id pa nla'awa Tarsus .
So the assemblies throughout all Judea , Galilee , and Samaria had peace and were built up . They were multiplied , walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit . ||| La ' a lera wo'ira-wo'ir ralamni de makpesiay Yesus makden Yudea uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani me makden Galilea rora Samaria edon rlernana yamuki-yama'ala pede rdella ' mtiertierannu ralamni . Rmor liola ya'unni-yamta'ata Itmatromni , ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nhi ' aruri ir pesiayni pede liawanni na'ititar lol to ' a .
As Peter went throughout all those parts , he came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda . ||| Petrus nla ' a meni-meni pa ntomra-nnah ' a makpesiay Yesus . La ' a lera ida , e nla nwaloha-nwalakat la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu makden leta Lida .
There he found a certain man named Aeneas , who had been bedridden for eight years because he was paralyzed . ||| La ' hande , de nwatrom nana muanke ' ida nwawa Eneas , mak kanin tar niek la genni wawannu anni wo'awa , onnila nakliu'uta .
Peter said to him , Aeneas , Jesus Christ heals you . Get up and make your bed ! Immediately he arose . ||| Noka Petrus nakot la , Eneas , Yesus Kristus Nhi ' u pa mlia ' a kalwiedni . Mumat wa pa mpuaho ' a-mpuatiernu dudgenmu ! Mtatande nekpa Eneas namat wa .
All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw him , and they turned to the Lord . ||| La'pa riy harahu makdella Lida me Saron ramkeka Eneas , dewade riy liawanni rpesiaya Itmatromni .
Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha , which when translated means Dorcas . This woman was full of good works and acts of mercy which she did . ||| Patke ' a id la Yope nwawa Tabita . Riy de , riy makpesiay Yesus . Nan yawetni la yawala Yunani de Dorkas nnia'eratni de rusa . Nhiolli-lietni samoga , pa la nara ' a-napalga riy maka kakleha-kaplara .
In those days , she became sick and died . When they had washed her , they laid her in an upper room . ||| Mere la ' ler de de namehra pa nmati . La'pa raroh mat die pa nhorwua , dewade retra la kamir mak kden heyanna .
As Lydda was near Joppa , the disciples , hearing that Peter was there , sent two men to him , imploring him not to delay in coming to them . ||| Leta Yope edon oliet wal lia ' leta Lida . Pede la'pa makpesiay Yesus la Yope ratlin nana de Petrus etla Lida , dewade rhopan doinia riy wor pua rodia lira-nnio ' di riwra , Tuna , pleta-plet pa mlia ' a gen miamni .
Peter got up and went with them . When he had come , they brought him into the upper room . All the widows stood by him weeping , and showing the tunics and other garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them . ||| Dewade Petrusa namat doin la , pa nla nlernohora re . Rla rte'ela hande wa , dewade rodia Petrus la mak kmati die geni no ' heyanna . Patyata re honona rtutrier lia onni pa rteparla knio ' a-kniakru , me rtutga rayanni me yohya ' a honona la ' , maka Dorkas ha nhor nana-nka'at nana la ira , la ' a ha nmormior mia'ta .
Peter sent them all out , and knelt down and prayed . Turning to the body , he said , Tabitha , get up ! She opened her eyes , and when she saw Peter , she sat up . ||| Mere Petrusa nhopan pa honona re rlergot momuou , noma nwaltior pa nsumbaini . Nhor nioka e napal tiemna mat die na'nama nakot la , Tabita , mumat wa ! Noka Tabita nwer matni ne la'pa namkek nana Petrus wa dewade namat pa namtatna .
He gave her his hand and raised her up . Calling the saints and widows , he presented her alive . ||| Noma Petrusa nte'la la limni , me nhi ' a pa napriri . Nhor nioka npolga patyata re , me makpesiaya Yesus korni , noka ntutga la , de patke ' de e nmormiori .
This became known throughout all Joppa , and many believed in the Lord . ||| Hihi ' a-yapyap die nwewar la Yope tetema , pede riy rahu mana rpesiaya Itmatromni .
He stayed many days in Joppa with a tanner named Simon . ||| Nhorwua dewade Petrusa ndella Yope , pa lera na'ida-naworu owa'an la ' a riy id romni nwawa Simon . Riy de mak ktulla-karia ha ulti .
Now there was a certain man in Caesarea , Cornelius by name , a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment , ||| La ' a Kaisarea , riy ida mak Yahudi atia ' a nwawa Kornelius . Riy de nhi ' o'tani la makodi keki-rautu rahu ida . Enodi plolli la makodi keki-rautu rwatiawua Itali .
a devout man , and one who feared God with all his house , who gave gifts for the needy generously to the people , and always prayed to God . ||| E ' de nora romni mniotni re , riy mak ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna ne nhiolli-lietni nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni . E ' mana nhi'de ntulan la riy Yahudi mniotni mak kakleha-kaplara , ne e nkol reri-nawur rer miamain la Uplerlawna .
At about the ninth hour of the day , he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him and saying to him , Cornelius ! ||| La ' lera ida , lera nhierni jam wotelu , de matni ri'ini npah ' a nan pa namkek nan samomuou Uplerlawna hopopanni ida nmai pia npolga , niwra , Kornelius ee !
He , fastening his eyes on him and being frightened , said , What is it , Lord ? He said to him , Your prayers and your gifts to the needy have gone up for a memorial before God . ||| Mere Kornelius namkeka hopopan de , de namta'at wenna , noka niwra , Hya ' a matrome ? Hopopan de nwahla , Polpuolmu-wakwakmu me ralam kalwiedmu la mak kakleha-kaplara Uplerlawna Nreinian oleka , ne Uplerlawna Nhoratre'ru .
Now send men to Joppa , and get Simon , who is also called Peter . ||| Dodo'ondi mhuopna riy rla ' Yope pa rpolga Simona maka ha rpol wal lia Petrus .
He is staying with a tanner named Simon , whose house is by the seaside . ||| E ' e ntawu tiar lia riy mak ktulla-karia ha ulti id romni , nwawa Simona . Riy die nhol lia ' eni gaini .
When the angel who spoke to him had departed , Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of those who waited on him continually . ||| La'pa Uplerlawna hopopanni naltier pia nhorwua na'nama nla'awa , noma Kornelius npolga hopopanni woru me makod kekni-rautnu ida mak nhi'inde natiak e ' a , maka nhiolli-lietni nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
Having explained everything to them , he sent them to Joppa . ||| Kornelius nwahaur momuoga hya ' maka ha namkek nan rella , na'nama nhopna rla'awa Yope wa . Noka rla'awa .
Now on the next day as they were on their journey and got close to the city , Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about noon . ||| Rla'awa , noma reparni lera nwawuau ro'onni , la'pa ralala ' rer mia'ta pa rwakrian lia Yope , dewade Petrusa nha'at la roma hananni pa nsumbaini .
He became hungry and desired to eat , but while they were preparing , he fell into a trance . ||| Noma naplar memna , ne niwra na'ana . La'pa rwahihi ' rer mia'ta ya'anni , dewade matni repar nana yamkeka ida .
He saw heaven opened and a certain container descending to him , like a great sheet let down by four corners on the earth , ||| Namkek nana lyanti nahniarti , ne hadoma emeka kok lihira wewerna pa rhuriernia la nohkerna , natniakloi lia uhunu re wogata .
in which were all kinds of four-footed animals of the earth , wild animals , reptiles , and birds of the sky . ||| La ' ralamni de nhiuri-wnia'ana , porni-dawarni , mak kawrika-kawriai me onu-ma'nu honona erla .
A voice came to him , Rise , Peter , kill and eat ! ||| Noka Petrus natlin nande , lira ida niwra , Petrusa mumata ! Mpunu-mpuen hare pa mu'una .
But Peter said , Not so , Lord , for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean . ||| Petrus nwahla , Uhmena , Matroma . A ' g edon u'un etia hya ' mak khaliarna me hya ' mak rmakriarnia .
A voice came to him again the second time , What God has cleansed , you must not call unclean . ||| Mere lirni owa'an la , Hya ' maka Uplerlawna Ntutg oleka pa ra'ana , de yan memmemna mukot miwra haliarna .
This was done three times , and immediately the thing was received up into heaven . ||| Yamkek de nati'ila-nawal niana re'eni wotel muemna , nhor diewade kok de narian pa nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Now while Peter was very perplexed in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean , behold , the men who were sent by Cornelius , having made inquiry for Simon 's house , stood before the gate , ||| Petrusa naplo ' tar lia hya ' maka ha namkek de . Petrusa ntepartarlia wniaror ma'ta , dewade riy mak Kornelius ha nhopna , rma rwahak nohora Simon romni , ne rte'ela puohrani gaini .
and called and asked whether Simon , who was also called Peter , was lodging there . ||| Noka rpolga riy pa ratiana , La handi de riy mak ktaw tiar lia e nwawa Simon Petrus etla handina ?
While Peter was pondering the vision , the Spirit said to him , Behold , three men seek you . ||| Petrus e ntepartar mua'ta la nwaror nohora mak ha matni ri'ini npah ' a nana re nnia'eratni . Dewade Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot la , Ee Petrus ! Riy wotelg e rtepartarlia o yahakmu .
But arise , get down , and go with them , doubting nothing , for I have sent them . ||| Oi , plet-plet pa muerun la yawa me yan mumta'ata mliernohora re . Yoma A ' g ed mak khopna re .
Peter went down to the men , and said , Behold , I am he whom you seek . Why have you come ? ||| Noma Petrusa nerun pa nakot la re , A ' g ed mak a'mu-hya'lu rahaka . La ' a hya ' pede mihak a ' u hyalmi re ?
They said , Cornelius , a centurion , a righteous man and one who fears God , and well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews , was directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house , and to listen to what you say . ||| Rwahla lirni , Perwira Kornelius nhopna ammai handi . Riy ploloi-plele'era id hade , ne ha natu namta'at Uplerlawna , ne makden Yahudi honona ratota-rawawa . Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu ida , nhopna e nwaka tuna pa nla ' a e romni , totpena natlin nana hya ' maka matro'mu nakota la e ' a .
So he called them in and provided a place to stay . On the next day Peter arose and went out with them , and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him . ||| Noma Petrusa nwak la hare pa rla'awa rialma , totpena rwarini plein la hande . Repar dewade Petrus namat pa la nod tiemna re , nor walia riy dom makpesiay lia Yope pa rlernohora . Noka rla'awa .
On the next day they entered into Caesarea . Cornelius was waiting for them , having called together his relatives and his near friends . ||| Rla'awa noma lera ida nlardoinia la , dewade rte'ela Kaisarea . La hande Kornelius nor wutga inni-narni me Kornelius mutwualli mak ha rpolu-rwak nana honona rwewiei Petrus .
When Peter entered , Cornelius met him , fell down at his feet , and worshiped him . ||| La'pa Petrusa nte'ewa pa niwa nler la rialma dewade , Kornelius nla ' pa nwaltiora-nwaltieman la Petrus gaini ralamni .
But Peter raised him up , saying , Stand up ! I myself am also a man . ||| Mere Petrusa nran apriria nhi ' a pa ntutrieri me nakot la , Mupriri-kdededa , upler atia ' a ' u , a ' niek de rimormiori wial a ' u .
As he talked with him , he went in and found many gathered together . ||| Nor Kornelius raltiertier mia'ta dewade , Petrusa nler la roma ralamni de namkek de riy rahu rawok olek la hande .
He said to them , You yourselves know how it is an unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself or come to one of another nation , but God has shown me that I should n't call any man unholy or unclean . ||| Noma nakot la re , Ina-nara ama-hyali , orgahami miatga , la ' a makden Yahudi re deullu-tatarni , de rahmen pa ma rtomra-rnah ' a riy mak Yahudi atia ' a onde rora rwatamputu emeka aghi ' a di . Mere na'nam di Uplerlawna Nhopn olek la mai a ' u la a yamke'ku ralamni pa , u'una ha mormiori mak kakdeha-kaktiahli . Ha nnia'eratni de totpa , yana awuarora de , Yahudi atia ' a re rakdeha-raktiahli .
Therefore I also came without complaint when I was sent for . I ask therefore , why did you send for me ? ||| Hade pede la'pa tuna nwak pa totpa amuai , de a ' g edonna wuayotlia . Pa la'pa dodo'ondi agiwa gat memna la ' a hya ' pede tuna nwak pa amuai ?
Cornelius said , Four days ago , I was fasting until this hour , and at the ninth hour , I prayed in my house , and behold , a man stood before me in bright clothing ||| Kornelius nwalolla , Tuna , melulu handena de lera emkadi , de lera nhierni jam 3 , asiumbain rerer lia ' a ro'mu . De plinu-plinniana muanke ' ida naprir lia a ga'yu , naniayarni nlipa-nka'ma .
and said , ‘ Cornelius , your prayer is heard , and your gifts to the needy are remembered in the sight of God . ||| Nakot niwra , Kornelius ! Uplerlawna Nreinian oleka polpuolmu-wakwakmu , ne Nhoratreria o ' la ralam kalwiedmu la riy mak kakleha-kaplara .
Send therefore to Joppa and summon Simon , who is also called Peter . He is staying in the house of a tanner named Simon , by the seaside . When he comes , he will speak to you . ' ||| Hade pede mhuopan pa riy rla ' a Yope , pa rpolga riy mak kwawa Simon Petrus . Riy de e ntawu tiar lia riy mak ktulla-karia ha ulti romni . Riy de nanni Simon , ne rom de ndella eni gaini .
Therefore I sent to you at once , and it was good of you to come . Now therefore we are all here present in the sight of God to hear all things that have been commanded you by God . ||| La hade pede pleta pa aghopna rtiy rpolga matro'mu , ne matro'mu ralam kalwiedni pa nmai wia . Pa dodo'ondi a hononami mawok tar lia handi la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni , totpena matlina-matailia lirmu-tunmu mak Uplerlawna Nhopna tuna nakota la ' ami .
Peter opened his mouth and said , Truly I perceive that God does n't show favoritism , ||| Noma Petrus nakot lirni , Ina-nara ama-hyali , dodo'ondi na'nama agatga plola la ' a Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni namneneha la riy honona .
but in every nation he who fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him . ||| Uplerlawna Nreililili-na'mamuau niana he ' a-he ' a la ' a hairi hya ' to ' a maka'unni-makamta'ata Uplerlawna , me mak kwehwa-klakat la ploloi-plele'era .
The word which he sent to the children of Israel , preaching good news of peace by Jesus Christ-he is Lord of all- ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miatg oleka Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni maka Nakot targa la Israel re . Nakot targa de onnila Yesus , maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar pua Namori-nalewna rimormiori , de itkalwied olek la Uplerlawna . Ne Yesus di de , Yahudi me Yahudi atia ' a Matromni .
you yourselves know what happened , which was proclaimed throughout all Judea , beginning from Galilee , after the baptism which John preached , ||| Hononmi miatg oleka la hya ' maka rhi ' ulga la Galilea la'pa la Yudea liewnu , la ' ler maka Yohansi nhaun pa niwra , Mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi , me miala inonmi pa rharania .
how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and with power , who went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil , for God was with him . ||| Miy miatga la ' ler de Uplerlawna Nwalir Yesus makden Nasaret de , pa Nala Nhiw Lululli la , me totpa Ntorna plola-mneha . Miat wualia de la'pa Yesus de Nla ' a meni-meni de totpena Nhi ' kalwieda-paitiota , e Nhi ' kalwieda riy honona maka hegana amlawanni nodi plolli la , yoma Uplerlawna Nora talla .
We are witnesses of everything he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem , whom they also killed , hanging him on a tree . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , am di nekpa , ed mak klin nohora-kmat nohor memna hya'-hya ' to ' a maka Ha Nhi'-nyapi lia Yerusalem me Yahudi letni korni . Emkade ho'mana rwal dioinia pa rla rwairia la auwlakra , ne ratuin doin memna aranni .
God raised him up the third day and gave him to be revealed , ||| Mere la'pa nodia lera wotellu , dewade Uplerlawna Namoria owa'ana la matmiatni ralamni , ne Ntutga Yesus la riy totpena ramkek nana de Nmori owa'ana .
not to all the people , but to witnesses who were chosen before by God , to us , who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead . ||| Mere edon Ntutga Yesus la riy honona , mere am tio ' a maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana mulaliaini , totpena mhi ' tlin nohora-mat nohor la . La ' a am di maka ma'an wutu-memun wutu nor E ' a , la ' a E Nmor owa'an la matmiatni ralamni .
He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as the Judge of the living and the dead . ||| Ne Enhopan pa amakot nohora lir kalwieda la riy , ne amala tlin nohora-mat nohora , de E ' nanpena Uplerlawna Nrana pa Ntorna watghudi lokarni la riy mak kmormior mia'ta , ne riy mak kmati olekwa .
All the prophets testify about him , that through his name everyone who believes in him will receive remission of sins . ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu honona raltier lia E ' wawannu . Ira raltier niohora riwra riy honona makpesiay Yesus de , hota Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli , onnila Yesus plolli-mneheni .
While Peter was still speaking these words , the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word . ||| Petrus naltiertier mia'ta , dewade Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nerun la riy honona wawannu mak katlina kota-de'et de .
They of the circumcision who believed were amazed , as many as came with Peter , because the gift of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles . ||| Yahudi mniotni mak kpesiay Yesus mak klernohora Petrus pa rmai , honona ema rtaplelleltarga ramkeka Uplerlawna mana Nal walia Nhiw Lululli la riy mak Yahudi atia ' a .
For they heard them speaking in other languages and magnifying God . Then Peter answered , ||| Yoma ratlina ri ' a re , raltier die rawala yawal dom pa ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna . Noma Petrus nhar lirni ,
Can anyone forbid these people from being baptized with water ? They have received the Holy Spirit just like us . ||| Mimkeka , Uplerlawna Nhurriernia E Nhiw Lululli la mak Yahudi atia ' a ri , pa emekwali Yahudi ita . Hade emkade pede hota Yahudi re ta'en niana rteri-rtawa rpa rharania .
He commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ . Then they asked him to stay some days . ||| Noma Petrus nhopan pa rharania re , de rweta la Yesus Kristus . La'pa nhorwua noma rwaka Petrus totpena nwarini plein nor ir la lera ida-woru .
Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God . ||| Noma mak Yesus Nhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni , me riy korni mak kpesiay Yesusa la ' Yudea liewnu ratlin nana riy maka Yahudi atia ' a mana rreinian oleka Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
When Peter had come up to Jerusalem , those who were of the circumcision contended with him , ||| Pede la ' pa lerni la Petrus nte'ela Yerusalem , Yahudi mak kpesiay olekwa re , rawo'or nohora Petrusa .
saying , You went in to uncircumcised men and ate with them ! ||| Ratiana Petrusa riwra , Nihya'pa omlia ' a Yahudi mniotni atia ' a romni-lewnu ? ! O ' mana mlier wut lia ira , pa omuora mi'in wutu-miemun wutu !
But Peter began , and explained to them in order , saying , ||| Hade pede Petrusa nwahaur la ira , hya'-hya ' honona maka e namkek nana , de nwaga la onni , pa la ' pa nhoru ,
I was in the city of Joppa praying , and in a trance I saw a vision , a certain container descending , like it was a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners . It came as far as me . ||| de niwra , Lera ida , asiumbain rer lia ' leta Yope , de a ma'tu nrepar nana yamkek ida , de hadom emeka koka lihira wewerna ida ralernia la lyanti , natniakloi lia uhunu re wogata , noka ralernia de kok de etla a o'nu walli .
When I had looked intently at it , I considered , and saw the four-footed animals of the earth , wild animals , creeping things , and birds of the sky . ||| La'pa a'umkek reria la ' ralamni de , umkek nana nhiuri-wnia'ana , makpora-kdawra , makawrika-kawriai , me onu-ma'nu .
I also heard a voice saying to me , ‘ Rise , Peter , kill and eat ! ' ||| Noka a'utlin nana lira ida niwra , Oi , mumata Petrusa . Mpunu-mpuenna hare pa mu'una .
But I said , ‘ Not so , Lord , for nothing unholy or unclean has ever entered into my mouth . ' ||| Mere awualolla , Taken niana Matroma . A ' g edonna 'un targa ya'ana-yemnu haliarna , me maka ha rmakriarnia .
But a voice answered me the second time out of heaven , ‘ What God has cleansed , do n't you call unclean . ' ||| Mere lirni owa'ana nwatiawu lyanti , Hya ' maka Uplerlawna Ntutga oleka pa ra'ana , de yan memmemna mukot miwra haliarna .
This was done three times , and all were drawn up again into heaven . ||| Dewade hya ' maka umkek nana de nati'ila-nawal niana re'eni wotel muemna , nhor diewade kok de narian pa nla'aw owa'an la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Behold , immediately three men stood before the house where I was , having been sent from Caesarea to me . ||| La ' ler de meman nekpa riy mantetelu mak kwatiawua Kaisarea , mak ha rhopan pa rma rwatrom a ' u mana rte'ela rom mak adiella .
The Spirit told me to go with them without discriminating . These six brothers also accompanied me , and we entered into the man 's house . ||| Noka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nhopna agora ir pa mla'awa , de yan umta'ata . Noma makpesiay wonema ri ror pa amla ' rewre'wa la ' pa amte'ela riy id nanni Kornelius de romni .
He told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house and saying to him , ‘ Send to Joppa and get Simon , who is called Peter , ||| Noma nwahaur nohora mai ami , emkameni la namkek nana Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu ida ntutga rupni la romni ralamni pa niwra , Mhuopna riy rla ' Yope , rla rpolga muanke ' ida mak kwawa Simon Petrus .
who will speak to you words by which you will be saved , you and all your house . ' ||| Hota nalde'et la tiy o ' a lir mak kodia mormiori-dardiari tiy o ' a , me rommu mniotni .
As I began to speak , the Holy Spirit fell on them , even as on us at the beginning . ||| Noma la'pa a'ultieri lira ida-woru emkade , de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nerun la ir wawannu , emolmolan wali maka Nhi ' nana mai it la ' ler ululu .
I remembered the word of the Lord , how he said , ‘ John indeed baptized in water , but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit . ' ||| Noka aghoratnana hya ' maka Itmatromni Nakot targa de , Yohansi nharania de nnairi gera mere miy die Uplerlawna Nala Nhiw Lululli pa Nodi plolli la miy .
If then God gave to them the same gift as us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ , who was I , that I could withstand God ? ||| Pede plolli de Uplerlawna Nal wal lia Nhiw Lululli la riy maka Yahudi atia ' a re , emekwali ita la ' ler maka it tpesiay Itmatromni Yesus Kristus . Hade pede emkameni pa atieri-tiawa Uplerlawna ? !
When they heard these things , they held their peace and glorified God , saying , Then God has also granted to the Gentiles repentance to life ! ||| La'pa makden Yahudi ri makpesiay Yesus ratlin nan Petrus lirni re honona , dewade ir edonna rakot hadomdom owa'ana . Mere ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna pa riwra , Hade emkade , de riy maka Yahudi atia ' a mana Uplerlawna Nal wal lia rpa rhoitio'ora-rtahnei dioinia do'oni-halli , ne rre ' pa rlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa .
They therefore who were scattered abroad by the oppression that arose about Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia , Cyprus , and Antioch , speaking the word to no one except to Jews only . ||| Lerni pa rwen oleka Stefanus wa , ir mana ramuki-rama'ala riy makpesiay Yesus re pa rhokar la ' a-rhokar maiya , nhi'nande ir ema kurge'era-karge'era lol meni-meni . Dom rawlar pia rla ' genni Fenisia , Siprus me Antiokia . Ira ralde'et nohora Uplerlawna lirni la ' a makden Yahudi mniotni rmeh ' a .
But there were some of them , men of Cyprus and Cyrene , who , when they had come to Antioch , spoke to the Hellenists , preaching the Lord Jesus . ||| Mere la ' a makpesiay rde , dom de rwatiawua Siprus , me Kirene , pa rla ' a Antiokia de rod kiota-ral de'et wali Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a Itmatromni Yesus Kristus della makden Yahudi atia ' a .
The hand of the Lord was with them , and a great number believed and turned to the Lord . ||| Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni etla hare wawannu , nhi'nande riy rahu rpesiaya , ne rala inonni rla Itmatromni .
The report concerning them came to the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem . They sent out Barnabas to go as far as Antioch , ||| Kotlola-de'etlol la hihi ' a-yapyapi re , nodia pa la ' memna makpesiay Yesusa no ' a Yerusalema . Noma rwahor nana Barnabas pa nla'awa Antiokia .
who , when he had come , and had seen the grace of God , was glad . He exhorted them all , that with purpose of heart they should remain near to the Lord . ||| La'pa Barnabas nte'ela hande , ne namkek memna emkameni la Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napalga riy re , dewade nahepur wenna . Noka nwak totpa hare ra ' rer pitpit lia Itmatromni , ral ralamni tetema .
For he was a good man , and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith , and many people were added to the Lord . ||| Barnabas di de , riy ralam samomuou ida de , ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la , ne npesiay matmiatia Itmatromni , nhi'nande riy rahu rpesiaya Itmatromni Yesusa .
Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for Saul . ||| Nhor nioka Barnabas nla ' a Tarsus pa nahaka Saulus .
When he had found him , he brought him to Antioch . For a whole year they were gathered together with the assembly , and taught many people . The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch . ||| La'pa nwatrom nan Saulus dewade nodia Saulus pa nla'awa Antiokia rora makpesiay Yesus no ' hande , pa rawok wut lia anin tetema ida ne rwatutu riy liawanni . Ler di la ' a Antiokia na'nama riy makpesiay Yesus rweta rla riy Kristen .
Now in these days , prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch . ||| La ' ler de de makwohorulu-ktatrulu doma rwatiawua Yerusalem pa rmai Antiokia .
One of them named Agabus stood up and indicated by the Spirit that there should be a great famine all over the world , which also happened in the days of Claudius . ||| La ' hare mutnu de riy id etla , nwawa Agabus . Onnila Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli rororni , Agabus naprir pia nala lira nnielu , de hota lar lawna nma nwewar nan noha-rai tetema . Ne hade nla ' lola la ' ler maka Kaisar Klaudius nodi plolli .
As any of the disciples had plenty , each determined to send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea , ||| Noma makpesiay Yesus re ra'an lira-remun waw pa ra'enyatga himima-rere'ela makpesiay makdella Yudea , rima-rima ra'enyat die rlernohora rurni-laini .
which they also did , sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul . ||| Noka rhopan pa Barnabas nora Saulus pa rla rodia himima-rere ' a rella makpesiay Yesus ullu-o'tani la hande .
Now about that time , King Herod stretched out his hands to oppress some of the assembly . ||| La ' ler de nekpa ray Herodes nmaklekal wa pa nhopna rtorna makpesiay Yesus , totpena ramuki-rama'ala .
He killed James , the brother of John , with the sword . ||| Yoma titni de , Yohansi hyalli mak kwawa Yakowsi rala wehla ya'ara ra rdawar wenna .
When he saw that it pleased the Jews , he proceeded to seize Peter also . This was during the days of unleavened bread . ||| La ' a Herodes yamkekni , illu-wniehwani de nla ' nana riy Yahudi ralamni pede nhi ' owa'ana emkade . Nhopan pa riy rla rtorna Petrus wali . Rla rtorna Petrus la ' a lerlalawna roti mak edonna rnairi tgo ' a .
When he had arrested him , he put him in prison and delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard him , intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover . ||| La ' pa rtoran nana Petrus , noma rodia la roma nhio'la ralamni . Rhor nana riy termida wehrani wonema , pa rwahernu-rwahal la yatiaka Petrus . Yatiaka ralamni de mak kla ' a rialma riy wogata-wogata . La'pa lerlalawan Paska maka Yahudi rhorat tuini-wedni la ler maka rlergot la Mesir , de nwair wa , nanpena Herodes niwa netlia Petrusa hihi'ini-yapyapni la mutliawna gaini .
Peter therefore was kept in the prison , but constant prayer was made by the assembly to God for him . ||| Pede Petrus ndella roma nhio'la ralamni , mere makpesiay Yesus mak kawoka re , e rpolpuolu-rwakwak pa nodi liarni la Uplerlawna yana Nolin limni-nwe'er rorni la Petrusa .
The same night when Herod was about to bring him out , Peter was sleeping between two soldiers , bound with two chains . Guards in front of the door kept the prison . ||| La'awa lera nmel wa Herodes edonna nakot nohor ma'ta Petrus la mutliawna gaini , de Petrus e nanin ma'ta , me rala ranti woru ra rwutu-rkohoga limni nora mak katiaka limni wali malwiru-malganna . La walia mak katiaka riy dom to ' a , e ratiak reria roma nhio'la nhiar liawanni .
And behold , an angel of the Lord stood by him , and a light shone in the cell . He struck Peter on the side and woke him up , saying , Stand up quickly ! His chains fell off his hands . ||| Plinu-plinnianama Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni-lili'irnu ntutga rupni pa ntutrier lia Petrusa onni , ne la ' gen die hitita-reprepra . Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu de nawo'la Petrus pa namat memna , noma nakot la Petrus , Ee , plet pa mumata ! Mtatande nekpa ranti natior dioin la Petrusa limni .
The angel said to him , Get dressed and put on your sandals . He did so . He said to him , Put on your cloak and follow me . ||| Nhior nioma Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni nakot la , Mhu'ru la naniayarmu rayanmu , me mpuatiehra lakmu wniowni . Noma Petrusa nlernohora lir de pa nhi ' a . Nakot wal lia Petrusa , Mhu'ru wal lia rain lawanmu ne mliernohor a ' u .
And he went out and followed him . He did n't know that what was being done by the angel was real , but thought he saw a vision . ||| Petrusa nlernohora pa rlergot la roma nhio'la ralamni . Mere Petrusa natniekamde , e ndarat nan to ' a .
When they were past the first and the second guard , they came to the iron gate that leads into the city , which opened to them by itself . They went out and went down one street , and immediately the angel departed from him . ||| La'pa rto'or doin oleka yatiak geni wor wua dewade , rte'ela nhiari mnotna mak kapal reria letlawna , noma nhiari rho'pani ema rtew dioinia . Noma rhargot pa rlernohora talla ida pa ntut lia honi . Rala ' rerer mia'ta de plinu-plinniana Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni de nwatlena .
When Peter had come to himself , he said , Now I truly know that the Lord has sent out his angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod , and from everything the Jewish people were expecting . ||| Emkade na'nama Petrusa hmuakarnu la ' temni . Na'nama natga de plol toto ' a pa Orgahi-Orha ' a mak khopna hopopanni pa nodia la Herodes plolli , me nodgiota la Yahudi re wniaror yatyatni .
Thinking about that , he came to the house of Mary , the mother of John who was called Mark , where many were gathered together and were praying . ||| La'pa nwarora emkade , dewade nla ' a Maria romni . Mari ' di , Yohansi inni . Yohansi di mak ha rpol wual lia ' Markusa . La ' hande riy rahu rawok pa rtepartarlia sniumbaini .
When Peter knocked at the door of the gate , a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer . ||| Petrusa nkorkor la puohrani , noma patke ' ida nmai pia niwa nhari nhiari . Patke ' di Maria hopopanni , de , nwawa Rode .
When she recognized Peter 's voice , she did n't open the gate for joy , but ran in and reported that Peter was standing in front of the gate . ||| La'pa Rode natga de lir de , Petrus lirni de nahepur nande edonna nhar wialia nhiari ne pleta-plet pa nawal lia rialma pa nakot la hare niwra , Ee , Petrusa etla tio'ora .
They said to her , You are crazy ! But she insisted that it was so . They said , It is his angel . ||| Rakot la , Omga ' u . Mere Rode ntekal reria pa nakot la re , Petrus toto ' hade . Pede mutwualli re rakot la Rode riwra , Edonna . Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu mak katiaka Petrus hade .
But Peter continued knocking . When they had opened , they saw him and were amazed . ||| Petrus nodi liarni to'ola nhiari kniorkorni . La'pa ir rla rharia nhiari pa ramkek nan Petrus de rhed muemna .
But he , beckoning to them with his hand to be silent , declared to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison . He said , Tell these things to James and to the brothers . Then he departed and went to another place . ||| Petrus nayer limni la totpena ramolmuolga . Noma Petrusa nwahaur nohor la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a hihi'ini-yapyapni emkameni pede nlergot la roma nhio'la ralamni . Noma Petrus nakot la re , La ' pa mikota la Yakowsi nora mutwualli korni wali . Nhorwua noma Petrus naltaru ira ne nla'awa geni dom to ' a .
Now as soon as it was day , there was no small stir among the soldiers about what had become of Peter . ||| Repar yawyawar ma'ta de lima-rora makodi keki-rautu mak katiaka re rkokna-rrarin nohora Petrusa molmuollu .
When Herod had sought for him and did n't find him , he examined the guards , then commanded that they should be put to death . He went down from Judea to Caesarea , and stayed there . ||| Herodes nhopan pa rahaka samomuou Petrus mere , riy edonna rlernana . La ' pede Herodes natian la ' a-natian mai mak katiaka Petrus , na'nama nhopan pa rwunu-rwenan mak katiaka re . Noma Herodes nwatiawu Yudea pa nla'awa Kaisarea pa nden la hande .
Now Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon . They came with one accord to him and , having made Blastus , the king 's personal aide , their friend , they asked for peace , because their country depended on the king 's country for food . ||| Herodes nawunu-nawenan la riy makdena Tirus me makdena Sidon . Hade pede rma rawok pa rwatrom la Herodes gaini ralamni . Rla ' ulga Blastus mak kla ' a o'tani ida la Herodes rom rayni , pa rwak la pa nherlia ira . Nhorwua noma , la rwak la Herodes pa rkalwieda , yoma ir letni ya'anni-yemannu de nawniair to'ola noha-rai mak Herodes handella .
On an appointed day , Herod dressed himself in royal clothing , sat on the throne , and gave a speech to them . ||| La ' a lera ida maka ha rakot targ oleka wa , de Herodes nnairia rain plalahwani mak ktutga de E ' de ray , me nla'awa liwangenni pa nakot lirni la ' a riy mutlialawna gaini ralamni . Nakot lirni pa nhorwua
The people shouted , The voice of a god , and not of a man ! ||| noma riy mutlialawna re riwa rhi ' amikria Herodes ralamni pede rpolu-rhaunu pa riwra , Hadi de upler lirni . Rimormiori lirni atia ' hadi .
Immediately an angel of the Lord struck him , because he did n't give God the glory . Then he was eaten by worms and died . ||| La ' a mtatande nekpa Orgahi-Orha ' a hopopanni nalernia mehra lawna la Herodesa yoma , nakleha nhiu'ru-nhielam pa , edon na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu . Noma Herodesa nmat die , yoma gargara ra'an doinia la .
But the word of God grew and multiplied . ||| Mere Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu npehpeh lol pa nawerna-naplahwa lolola , ne makpesiay re yeher to ' a pa na'ititar rer lia .
Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem when they had fulfilled their service , also taking with them John who was called Mark . ||| Ne la'pa Barnabas nora Saulus rodia himima-rere ' a la makpesiay Yesus pa nhorwua , dewade rpolan la Yerusalem de rodia Yohansi maka ha rwet walia Markus pa ror rewre'wa talla .
Now in the assembly that was at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers , Barnabas , Simeon who was called Niger , Lucius of Cyrene , Manaen the foster brother of Herod the tetrarch , and Saul . ||| La ' a riy mak kpesiay Yesus mak kden la Antiokia , de makwohorulu-ktatrulu rora mak kwatutu-kwaye ' a erla hande , de Barnabas , Simeon maka rweta la Niger nnia'eratni de , riy metmetma , Lukius mak kwatiawua Kirene , Menahem maka rlahu wut niohora la raiya Herodes , me Saulus .
As they served the Lord and fasted , the Holy Spirit said , Separate Barnabas and Saul for me , for the work to which I have called them . ||| La'awa lerni pa makpesiay rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Orgahi-Orha ' a ne ratahan lara , noma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot la ira , Awualir nian oleka Barnabas nor Saulus . Hade pede mtiutmuata-mkiewra ' a hare , totpa rkar lia ' A knia'ru ralamni .
Then , when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them , they sent them away . ||| Rsumbaini me ratahan lara pa nhorwua noma rran limni la Barnabas nor Saulus o'tani totpa rrana rpa rkar lia Uplerlawna kniarni , na'nama rhopan pa rla rhi ' kniarni de .
So , being sent out by the Holy Spirit , they went down to Seleucia . From there they sailed to Cyprus . ||| Barnabas nora Saulus rla'awa Seleukia , yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli nhiopanni . Rden la hande pa rhopal pa rla'awa noha Siprus .
When they were at Salamis , they proclaimed God 's word in the Jewish synagogues . They also had John as their attendant . ||| La'pa rla'awa la ' a Salamis , dewade rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la ' roma-lewu maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli . Yohansi maka ha rwet walia Markus nre'ela kniarni re , la ' talla ralamni .
When they had gone through the island to Paphos , they found a certain sorcerer , a false prophet , a Jew whose name was Bar Jesus , ||| La'pa rala ' a la kniari la noha Siprus ewatni-lahwani , pa rla rtut lia ' a leta Papos . La hande de rwatrom nana Yahudi ida , nwawa Bar Yesus . Kniarni de , nhi ' ukru-rehera mak kamehi-kayona , ne nalahar pa nakotiwra e ' de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id e ' a .
who was with the proconsul , Sergius Paulus , a man of understanding . This man summoned Barnabas and Saul , and sought to hear the word of God . ||| Sergius Paulus , mak khi ' ulu-o'ta la gen die , nora Bar Yesus de rora nhi'inde rwatamputu . Mak khi ' ulu-o'ta de , de riy mak katu . Npolga Barnabas nor Saulus yoma niwra nor wal pia natlina Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
But Elymas the sorcerer for so is his name by interpretation withstood them , seeking to turn the proconsul away from the faith . ||| Mere Bar Yesus , mak kwawa la yawala Yunani de Elimas de nnia'eratni de mak khi ' ukru-rehera , nhi ' oruli-augewat la Barnabas nora Saulus . Ntekal rer lia , totpa mak khi ' ulu-o'ta de yana npesiaya Yesus .
But Saul , who is also called Paul , filled with the Holy Spirit , fastened his eyes on him ||| Mere Saulus maka rpol wualia la Paulus de , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la pa namkek tutga mak khi ' ukru-rehera mak kamehi-kayon de .
and said , You son of the devil , full of all deceit and all cunning , you enemy of all righteousness , will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord ? ||| Na'nama Saulus nakot la , Ee mak kodia kdiori-kdieha putra-palka hegana upni-a'nani o ' a . He'-he ' mak hihi'ini-yapyapni illu-wniehwani naplol la Uplerlawna gaini , de omhi ' oruli-augewat la hare . Omhi ' a-myapi , edonna mrie'nu la mpueyata-mpuaniawua Orgahi-Orha ' a wniarorni-wnialaini mak kiwra kodia rimormiori la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
Now , behold , the hand of the Lord is on you , and you will be blind , not seeing the sun for a season ! Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him . He went around seeking someone to lead him by the hand . ||| Pen mumkek la dodo'ondi . Orgahi-Orha ' a hota Nukmu o ' a . Hota omlier la melli-kalamni . Hota omuplinga tipru-warta ra ' i-tranna la dodo'ondi . Edon nalo'on wali ne Bar Yesus yamkekni de emolmolla ponpona-mamuahu , memetma nwow nana e matni , pa nala ' de dudunti-wetwetria hoho ' a-hayaya , pa nahaka mak kalakra .
Then the proconsul , when he saw what was done , believed , being astonished at the teaching of the Lord . ||| La'pa o'ta-mat de namkeka hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a la Bar Yesus dewade o'ta-mat de npesiaya Yesus . Me nwer rer wiawni la wniatutu-wniaye ' a re la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a yala'ani .
Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia . John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem . ||| Rwatiawua Papos noma Paulus nora kniarwialli re rhopal pa rla ' a leta Perga , la Pamfilia . La hande noma Yohansi maka ha rwet walia Markus naltar ira ne nawal lia Yerusalem .
But they , passing on from Perga , came to Antioch of Pisidia . They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat down . ||| Rden la Perga noma rodi liarni la leta Antiokia la Pisidia . La'pa Sabat lerni de ler maka riy edonna rkar lia , noma rla'awa pa ramtatna la gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli .
After the reading of the law and the prophets , the rulers of the synagogue sent to them , saying , Brothers , if you have any word of exhortation for the people , speak . ||| La'pa rpaiki ahorga Musa pukni , me makwohorulu-ktatrulu pukni , noma roma kreini de o'tani-matni rhopan pa riy ratiana Paulus nora talanwalli re , riwra , Ama-hyal miy re , la'pa miwa miala nnio ' a-niat diom pa mhi ' aruri a pesiay mamni , de ampak pa mikota .
Paul stood up , and gesturing with his hand said , Men of Israel , and you who fear God , listen . ||| Noma Paulus naprir pia nayer limni la totpena ramolmuolga , na'nama nakot lirni , Ina-ama krei , ama-hyali ina-nara la'pa a'na mak kden la Israel di , ne mak Israel mutnu atia ' a , la'pa it hononit di mak ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna . Mtiulan pa mhieri tlinmi la lir mak a'ukota ri .
The God of this people chose our fathers , and exalted the people when they stayed as aliens in the land of Egypt , and with an uplifted arm , he led them out of it . ||| Uplerlawna maka makden Israel ita tkola tieru-tawur nehla . Ne Nwalir niana-nalioh nana it upni-tgarni , me Napeha-nalawna rla Mesir , la gen miaka rdella emolmolla mak kahulti-kahamra . Noma Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni pa Nodgiot ir la ' a Mesir .
For a period of about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nod niohor neka ira wniehwani-liakatni la ' a wo'ora-kawru la ' anni terampwogata ralamni .
When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan , he gave them their land for an inheritance for about four hundred fifty years . ||| Noma hairi wo'itu rimormiorni de , Uplerlawna Nkuhi-nho'ora la ' a noha Kana'ana , totpena hairi Israela nanie'era-nahniakar la hande , totpena Kana'an de Israel gahani .
After these things , he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet . ||| Lerni pa Israela mniotni rla'awa Mesir nhi ' na'nama rmai owa'an la Kana'ana , pa rhi ' a noh della ir gahani , de mahnekni la'pa edon nhal de anni rahu wogata terampwolima . La la'pa rhakar doinia noh Kana'an uhunu-ewatni , dewade Uplerlawna Nhopan pa rrana mak ktorna deulu-tatra . Noma la'awa me'eta-anin nlol wa pa la ' pa Samuel lerni . Samuel de mak ktorna deulu-tatra hohoni . Makwohorulu-ktatrulu id wali hade .
Afterward they asked for a king , and God gave to them Saul the son of Kish , a man of the tribe of Benjamin , for forty years . ||| Nhor nioma Israel mniotni rwak walia Samuel pa nrana ray ida . Noka Uplerlawna Ntutga Saul , Kisa a'nani la ' a Benyamina duratni-waitni . Noka Saul nla ' nan ray anni terampwogata .
When he had removed him , he raised up David to be their king , to whom he also testified , ‘ I have found David the son of Jesse , a man after my heart , who will do all my will . ' ||| Noma Uplerlawna Nalernia Saul la ' mtatangenni , dewade Nran owa'an Daud pa nla ' ray lia ira . Uplerlawna Nakot nohora Daud , Niwra , Aliernana oleka Daud , Isai a'nani de , la ' a riy mak khi ' amikri A ralmu . Hota e ' ed mak klernohora A ralma-rio'ru .
From this man 's offspring , God has brought salvation to Israel according to his promise , ||| Hota Daud nadurti-nawait nana riy maka Uplerlawna Nwalir oleka wa , la ' a Israel hairni rerieini , de hota riy de nodia rimormiori la mormiori-dardiari , emekwalia hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'targ oleka wa . De Yesus de ed maka Ha Nakota .
before his coming , when John had first preached the baptism of repentance to Israel . ||| La la'pa Yesus edonna Nkar mia'ta E kniarni , de Yohansi nhaun olek la Israel rimormiorni , totpena rhoitio'ora-rtahnei dioinia do'oni-halli ne rharania re .
As John was fulfilling his course , he said , ‘ What do you suppose that I am ? I am not he . But behold , one comes after me , the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie . ' ||| Ne nhi'pa la ler la kniarni hohoni , Yohansi nhi'inde nakot la riy niwra , La ' a miy wniarormi de a ' di de he ' a ? Maka mimpiei-mniar de a ' g edonna . Mhioratreria , hota riy de , amuai ulu nanpena Ha Nmai . Hota awue'er doin lakni wniowni ho'mana a ' g edonna puar nana .
Brothers , children of the stock of Abraham , and those among you who fear God , the word of this salvation is sent out to you . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Abrahama duratni-waitni , me maka Yahudi atia ' a , de riy honona mak ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna . Uplerlawna Na'enyat oleka kota la ' a Yesus mak kamori-kalewan de mai ita .
For those who dwell in Jerusalem , and their rulers , because they did n't know him , nor the voices of the prophets which are read every Sabbath , fulfilled them by condemning him . ||| Riy mak kden la Yerusalem rora ir o'tani-matni edonna rhe'du nana Yesus de ed mak kamori-kalewna . Ir edonna rna'erit nana makwohorulu-ktatrulu wniatutnu , maka rpaikia la ' a Sabat lerni pede irukmu Yesusa . Mere la ' a hihi'ini-yapyapni re , pede hya ' maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu ha ror taru re , Israel mniotni rhi ' nana-ryap niana .
Though they found no cause for death , they still asked Pilate to have him killed . ||| Kennama edonna rlernan walia hadom la E ' a , retlia nekpa rukum wenna . Noka rwak la Pilatus pa totpena rwenna .
When they had fulfilled all things that were written about him , they took him down from the tree and laid him in a tomb . ||| Ne la'pa rhi ' a-ryapia hare honona mak ha rhorat targa la Puk Lululli la E wawannu , noma iralerni owa'ana la ' auwlakra hananni pa rla rade ' a la liena ralamni .
But God raised him from the dead , ||| Mere Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana la matmiatni ralamni .
and he was seen for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem , who are his witnesses to the people . ||| Nhor owa'ana de , nalera-namela , noma Ntutga-nharia inonni la riy mak kora lek E ' talla rwatiawua Galilea pa rokria Yerusalem . Hare er maka la'pa dodo'ondi , de irden wal pia rlin nohora-rmat nohora E ' a la ' a Israel mniotni .
We bring you good news of the promise made to the fathers , ||| Hade pede dodo'ondi , de amakot nohora Kot Kalwieda tiy miy , la ' a hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la it upni-tgarni ,
that God has fulfilled this to us , their children , in that he raised up Jesus . As it is also written in the second psalm , ‘ You are my Son . Today I have become your father . ' ||| E Nhi ' oleka hade mai ita la ' a Namoria Yesus owa'an la ' a matmiatni ralamni . Ina-nara ama-hyali , la Puka ralamni wal pia , de rhorat targa la ' a Yesus Nmori lia matmiati-molmuolu ralamni . Yoma la ' a Puk Masmur onni woru ralamni de , e rhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni la ' a Yesus , de , A a'nu O ' a . La ' a ler di de , Atiutga la riy honona de , O ' Ammu A ' u .
Concerning that he raised him up from the dead , now no more to return to corruption , he has spoken thus , ‘ I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David . ' ||| Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana Yesus la ' a matmiatni ralamni . Pa hota dodo'ondi de edonna Nler la matmiati-molmuolu ralamni . La eda de pede Uplerlawna Nhar lirni , Pena Agala Nnio ' Lululli plollolli tiy O ' a . Hota Aghapartiklia mak A'ukottarg oleka la Daud .
Therefore he says also in another psalm , ‘ You will not allow your Holy One to see decay . ' ||| Emkade wal lia ' Masmur onni pasal dom to ' a Daud nakot la Uplerlawna , O ' edonna Mhur niohora hopopanmu mak katlina-katailla O ' a de inonni ngehpa la matmiati-molmuolu .
For David , after he had in his own generation served the counsel of God , fell asleep , was laid with his fathers , and saw decay . ||| La ' a lirni de Daud edon nakot nohora inon wamueheni yoma lera ida nmat wia pa rtamin wutga la upni-tgarni . Yoma la'pa Daud nhi ' oleka hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhopna e nhi ' a , dewade nmati ne inonni mana napiat olekwa la'pa ngehpa-nta'la .
But he whom God raised up saw no decay . ||| Miy hononmi mitlina . Daud edon nakot nohora inon wamueheni , mere nakot nohora Yesus mak Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana la matmiatni ralamni , de Yesus edonna Nler la matmiati-molmuolu ralamni pa Ngehpa .
Be it known to you therefore , brothers , that through this man is proclaimed to you remission of sins , and by him everyone who believes is justified from all things , from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy re , la hade pede amakot nohora tiy miy totpa miatga , de lol Yesus wawannu de , it do'oni-halli honona ramou-rawitna . Ne riy nenenna mak kpesiay Yesusa , Uplerlawna Netlia de , hare de edon rhala . Mere la'pa itlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni to ' a , de la Uplerlawna gaini de it edon taplol ma'ta .
Beware therefore , lest that come on you which is spoken in the prophets , ||| Hade pede mpuahniorta me ! Yanhi'pa makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni ntuin tar tiy miy . Har lirni re riwra ,
‘ Behold , you scoffers ! Wonder and perish , for I work a work in your days , a work which you will in no way believe , if one declares it to you . ' ||| Mimkek kalwiedweda he ' maka nhi'inde kwatei-kwahapra A li'ru . Hota miy mhiedu , noma mmiati pa mlia ' ai mormiori ralamni . Yoma hota la ' ler maka mmiormior mia'ta de , de hota A ' g e tiepartarlia ghi ' hadomdoma mak kodia miy lia kropna-krieutu luilui-nunuhru . La'pa riy rakot nohora hota Aghi ' emkade tiy miy , ta'en niana mpiesiaya . Mitlina olek me mhioratreria samomuou .
So when the Jews went out of the synagogue , the Gentiles begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath . ||| Nakot pa nhorwua noma , la'pa Paulus nora Barnabas e rlergot la gen miaka Yahudi rhi ' a kreini-iskolli de , dewade riy mak kden la krei die rwak pa rrora nanpena rawali owa'an la Sabat mak kmai , totpena rhauri aplahwa wniahaur dodo'ona .
Now when the synagogue broke up , many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas , who , speaking to them , urged them to continue in the grace of God . ||| La'pa riy rlergot la krei die ralamni , noma riy Yahudi liawanni rora mak Yahudi atia ' , mak kla ' oleka Yahudi kreini agamni rlernohor reria Paulus nora Barnabas . Makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni ri , rwagahniort owa'ana mak klernohora re , totpena rapniapan rer miamain la Uplerlawna kalwiedni .
The next Sabbath , almost the whole city was gathered together to hear the word of God . ||| La'pa Sabat mak kmai owa'ana , de trema-trema riy honona mak kden la letlawan de rma ratlina Itmatromlawanni lirni-tunnu .
But when the Jews saw the multitudes , they were filled with jealousy , and contradicted the things which were spoken by Paul , and blasphemed . ||| La'pa riy Yahudi ramkek nana riy liawanni rmai , dewade ir rahankeran doin iri hati la . Ir rwohor weyata-rtatar waniawua Paulusa , me rahmena-rapraiya hya ' mak ha nakotkota re .
Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly , and said , It was necessary that God 's word should be spoken to you first . Since indeed you thrust it from yourselves , and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life , behold , we turn to the Gentiles . ||| Mere Paulus nora Barnabas edonna rwadur la ltierni mak kaplola re pa rakot la re , Uplerlawna Nhopan pa amakot nohor ulu Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la Yahudi miy , mere mihmena mrieiniana , pede orgahami mtiut tiarga de , Uplerlawna edon Nwalir nian miy pia mliernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Pa dodo'ondi amhoitio'or tiy miy , pa la ' pa amakot nohora Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni la mak Yahudi atia ' a re .
For so has the Lord commanded us , saying , ‘ I have set you as a light for the Gentiles , that you should bring salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth . ' ||| Yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhopna ami , Niwra , Atiut olek mimlia ' lodna-hairi dom to ' a , pa miodia la lelerni . Totpena miy er mak kodia mormiori-dardiari la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni .
As the Gentiles heard this , they were glad and glorified the word of God . As many as were appointed to eternal life believed . ||| La'pa riy maka Yahudi atia ' ratlin nana lira re , de ralamni rahepuepru pa ra'uli-rawed reria Orgahi-Orha ' a , onnila E lirni . Ne riy maka Uplerlawna Nwalir oleka pa rlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa de , honona rpesiaya .
The Lord 's word was spread abroad throughout all the region . ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni nwewar la noh de ewatni-lahwani .
But the Jews stirred up the devout and prominent women and the chief men of the city , and stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas , and threw them out of their borders . ||| Mere o'ta-mata mak kden la let de , rora patke ' a marna-wuhura mak kamta'ata Uplerlawna re , Yahudi mniotni rodia lir yawewal yatyat la , nhi'nande rhi ' a kokokna-rariarin la Paulus nor Barnabas . Noma rhokar doinia irrora la ' noh de .
But they shook off the dust of their feet against them , and came to Iconium . ||| Makodia Yesus lirni rora rlergot wa , noma rrora rkakan doinia lakni makamnu la riy mak kden hande , totpena rtutga Uplerlawna Nwayotli ira , noma rla'awa Ikonium .
The disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit . ||| Mere la ' a Antiokia de makpesiay re ramuki-rahepru , me Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la .
In Iconium , they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews , and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed . ||| Noma la ' pa Paulus nora Barnabas rte'ela Ikonium dewade , hya ' maka rhi ' oleka la Antiokia de rhi ' owa'an la hande , de rrora rla'awa la gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli , ne rodi plolli pa raltier niohor Yesus la ' hande , reiniande makden Yahudi , me Yahudi mniotni atia ' a , harahu rpesiay Yesus .
But the disbelieving Jews stirred up and embittered the souls of the Gentiles against the brothers . ||| Mere Yahudi mniotni mak kahmena kpesiay re , rawewla maka Yahudi atia ' a , pa rhi ' a ralam mehra rer lia riy mak kpesiay lia Yesus .
Therefore they stayed there a long time , speaking boldly in the Lord , who testified to the word of his grace , granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands . ||| Mere riy harahu rpesiaya , pede Paulus nora Barnabas rden la hande pa mahneka . Ne rrora rparan pia raltier niohora la ' a Itmatromni Yesus wniahaurnu . Itmatromlawanni wal pia , Ntut muemna hya ' mak ha rakotkota la ' E ralam kalwiedni de , plola , yoma E Nal ir pa rodia plolli , totpena rhi ' a-ryapia hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona , mak tutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini nhi'nande riy ema rtaplelleltarga .
But the multitude of the city was divided . Part sided with the Jews and part with the apostles . ||| Mere let de mniotni idma edonna ntelan nana-naut nan ida . Doma rler wut lia Yahudi mniotni , me dom de rher lia irrora .
When some of both the Gentiles and the Jews , with their rulers , made a violent attempt to mistreat and stone them , ||| Noma Yahudi mniotni , rora ir o'tani-matni , me Yahudi mniotni atia ' a re , rla ' a lira id pa rtota la klieratni , pa riwra ra'ala watu ra rwatliewur wenna makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni rora re .
they became aware of it and fled to the cities of Lycaonia , Lystra , Derbe , and the surrounding region . ||| Mere makodia Uplerlawna lirni re ratlin nan hade pa rat niohor wal lia . Noma rawlari lia leta Listra me leta Derbe mak kden la Likanonia , ne rla ' walia geni-tiena mak rehgorgor lia leta-leta re .
There they preached the Good News . ||| La hande , rakot nohor walia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de .
At Lystra a certain man sat , impotent in his feet , a cripple from his mother 's womb , who never had walked . ||| Noma muanke ' id la Listra , de lakni nmati nod miemna la apun ralma pa edonna nala ' taru , yoma lakni nakleh ruri . Riy de namtatna la hande ,
He was listening to Paul speaking , who , fastening eyes on him and seeing that he had faith to be made whole , ||| pa natlin la Paulus wniahaurnu . Paulus namkek tutga riy de , Paulus nat niohor memna riy de npesiaya e lirni , pa hota ha nler la kalwiedni .
said with a loud voice , Stand upright on your feet ! He leaped up and walked . ||| Noma Paulus nhaun pa nakot la , Mupriri pia mtiutrier kdededa ! Dewade pleta-plet pa riy de naprir pia nala'awa .
When the multitude saw what Paul had done , they lifted up their voice , saying in the language of Lycaonia , The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men ! ||| La'pa riy rahu ramkek Paulus hihi'ini-yapyapni de , noma rhaun pa rawala Likanonia , riwra , Marna-ornoha rhar pia rerun weee !
They called Barnabas Jupiter , and Paul Mercury , because he was the chief speaker . ||| Noma rpolga Barnabas della ir uplerni Seus , ne Paulus demade rpolga la ir uplerni Hermes , yoma e ' ed mak kaltieri .
The priest of Jupiter , whose temple was in front of their city , brought oxen and garlands to the gates , and would have made a sacrifice along with the multitudes . ||| Makpolwunu-wakler la marna Seus mak roma polu-wak genni la leta gaini , nmai pia nodia lembu ltiata re , me au dieutu re pa nokria puohra . Niwa la'pa nlernohor wut lia riy mutlialawna re , pa la ' pa nala limtutnu totpa rhi ' a la nhioi-tniani la makodia Uplerlawna lirni rora re .
But when the apostles , Barnabas and Paul , heard of it , they tore their clothes and sprang into the multitude , crying out , ||| La'pa Barnabas nora Paulus ratlin nana hya ' mak ha riwa rhi ' a re , dewade rrora rlihira-rnaiya naniayarni , pa rawlar lia mutlialawna re letgarni , ne rhaun pa rakot la re ,
Men , why are you doing these things ? We also are men of the same nature as you , and bring you good news , that you should turn from these vain things to the living God , who made the sky , the earth , the sea , and all that is in them , ||| Hoi , nihya'pa miy mhi ' ha rina ? ! Am di de rimormior ami , it rewre'wa pa tamneneha . Ammai handi , de amodia Kota Kalwieda-Paitiot tiy miy , totpena mhioitio'or doini-mtiahnei dioinia la mhioi-mtiania uplera mak edon kaplola , ne mai pia mliernohora Uplerlawna mak kden pa nodi liarni . Yoma E ' de maka Na'ohi-na'ara nohkerna-lyanit marna , la'pa gera-tah ' i nor wutga mniotni .
who in the generations gone by allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways . ||| It upni-tgarni lerni de Uplerlawna Nhur niohora rimormiori la hairi-hairi pa rmor niohora kirkira-ralma-rior wamueheni , pa rpolu-rwak la atiehrani uplerni .
Yet he did n't leave himself without witness , in that he did good and gave you rains from the sky and fruitful seasons , filling our hearts with food and gladness . ||| Mere Uplerlawna nekane Nala lin nohora-mat nohora la inon wamueheni , totpena riy rlernohor E ' a , yoma Nhi ' kalwieda-paitiota mai ita , de e Nhuria otna la ' a lyanti pa nturu , me tani nalgota wullu-we'elli mai pia treikia . Enala ya'ana-yemun mai ita pa niniha-malmial ita .
Even saying these things , they hardly stopped the multitudes from making a sacrifice to them . ||| Mere lira-tunu emkade ho'mana , makodia Uplerlawna lirni rora re , nhi'pa trema-trema taken niana ir rwayotil nana limtut mak ha rala pa rhi ' nhioi-tniani la ira , yoma rwaror ma'ta de irrora de uplerni-upmatni .
But some Jews from Antioch and Iconium came there , and having persuaded the multitudes , they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city , supposing that he was dead . ||| Noma Yahudi mak kden la Antiokia me mak kwatiawu Ikonium dom pali , rma rod nur lia riy liawanni makden Listra pa rawali totpa rler teman la Yahudi re owa'ana . Ral watu ra rwatliewur wenna Paulus , nhor nioma ra'ita la leta to'orni . Ratniekamde Paulus ha nmati oleka wa .
But as the disciples stood around him , he rose up , and entered into the city . On the next day he went out with Barnabas to Derbe . ||| Mere la'pa riy mak kpesiay re e rtutrier niohor ma'ta , dewade naprir wia pa nler owa'an la leta ralamni . Repar dewade , nora Barnabas rla'awa Derbe .
When they had preached the Good News to that city and had made many disciples , they returned to Lystra , Iconium , and Antioch , ||| La ' a Derbe Paulus nora Barnabas rakot nohor Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de , ne riy rahu rpesiaya Yesus . Nhor nioma rla'awa Listra pa nhorwua noma Ikonium , noma rla'awa leta Antiokia .
strengthening the souls of the disciples , exhorting them to continue in the faith , and that through many afflictions we must enter into God 's Kingdom . ||| La ' a leta-leta re de , rhi ' aruria mak kpesiay Yesus re ihranu ralamni , ne rano ' a-ra'atga rpa yana rwadur la pesiayni la ' Yesus . Riwra , Ina-nara ama-hyali , it di tlernan ulu mehra-mau liawanni , nanpena itler la Uplerlawna genni mak Enodi plolli pa emeka Ray . Emkadella makodia Uplerlawna lirni re wniatutnu-wniaye'eni la makpesiay Yesus la ' a leta-leta re .
When they had appointed elders for them in every assembly , and had prayed with fasting , they commended them to the Lord on whom they had believed . ||| Paulus nora Barnabas rrana mak khi ' o'tani-matni la ' makpesiay Yesus re totpena rima-rima wokni o'tani-matni erla . Noma rsumbaini me ratahan lara pa rala o'ta-mata re la Itmatromlawanni maka ha rpesiay oleka de .
They passed through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia . ||| Nhorwua dewade Paulus nora Barnabas rodi liarni la Pamfilia , rleretia Pisidia .
When they had spoken the word in Perga , they went down to Attalia . ||| Me rla ' pa rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la ' a Perga , noma rla'awa Atalia la eni wawannu .
From there they sailed to Antioch , from where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled . ||| Rden la hande pa rhopal pa rawal lia Antiokia . Let de ed maka ir genni ululu mak kal ir la Uplerlawna lo'mani ralamni , totpena rkari ahorga kniarni mak na'nama ha rkaria .
When they had arrived and had gathered the assembly together , they reported all the things that God had done with them , and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations . ||| La'pa ha rte'ela Antiokia , noma rawoka makpesiay Yesus la hande . Ne rwahaur nohor hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' oleka la ira kniarni ralamni , de la ' a emkameni la Uplerlawna Nhar tialan la riy maka Yahudi atia ' totpena rpesiay Yesus .
They stayed there with the disciples for a long time . ||| La ' a let de , Paulus nora Barnabas ror wutga makpesiay rden la hande pa mahneka .
Some men came down from Judea and taught the brothers , Unless you are circumcised after the custom of Moses , you ca n't be saved . ||| Lera ida ne riy wo'ira memna rwatiawu Yudea pa rmai lia Antiokia , me rwatutga Yahudi atia ' a mak kpesiay mai Antiokia de , riwra , La'pa miy edonna mtiolliohora ma'ta Musa tatarni pa rsunta , de hota edonna mliernana mormiori mak kodi liarni .
Therefore when Paul and Barnabas had no small discord and discussion with them , they appointed Paul , Barnabas , and some others of them to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question . ||| Noka Paulus nor Barnabas rawenan toto ' meman la re , la ' a wniarorni-wnialaini re . Nhor diewade makpesiay Yesus la hande , retlia Paulus nor Barnabas , rora riy dom makpesiay makden Antiokia rewre'wa , pa rla ' a Yerusalem totpa rora makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni , me o'ta-mata krei rwahu'ru ralma-riora la ' a sunat la hande .
They , being sent on their way by the assembly , passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria , declaring the conversion of the Gentiles . They caused great joy to all the brothers . ||| Makpesiay Yesus mak kden la Antiokia rlidan nohora pa rlergot la leta , nhor diewade Paulus nora talanwalli re rodi liarni la'pa rlola Fenisia me Samaria . La hande rwahaur nohora Yahudi atia ' a re ral oleka inonni pa rpesiay Yesus . La'pa ratlin nana kot de , de makpesiay re rahepur memna .
When they had come to Jerusalem , they were received by the assembly and the apostles and the elders , and they reported everything that God had done with them . ||| Rla ' pa rte'ela Yerusalem , dewade makpesiay Yesus la ' hande rreiniana-ra'nana nora kalwiedni . Emkade wal lia makodia Uplerlawna lirni me o'ta-mata krei honona . Noma rwahaur nohor la , hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a-nyapia la ira kniarni ralamni .
But some of the sect of the Pharisees who believed rose up , saying , It is necessary to circumcise them , and to command them to keep the law of Moses . ||| Mere Parisi mniotni dom mak kpesiay oleka Yesus raprir pia rwahla mak ha rakota re . Riwra , Riy maka Yahudi atia ' mak kpesiay oleka re musti rsunta , me rlernohora Musa tatarni korni walli .
The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter . ||| Noma makodia Uplerlawna lirni re , rora o'ta-mata krei rawok pa rwahaur nohora lirni ri .
When there had been much discussion , Peter rose up and said to them , Brothers , you know that a good while ago God made a choice among you that by my mouth the nations should hear the word of the Good News and believe . ||| Nalo'on meman la rwahu'ru ralma-riora , pa la'awa hohoni noma Petrus naprir pia nakot lirni , Ina-ama ama-hyal miy re , it hononit tatg oleka la ler mak itto'or doini olek de , Uplerlawna Nwalir nian a lia hononmi , totpena a ' g e mak kodia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot della ' riy maka Yahudi atia ' , totpena ratlina pa rpesiaya .
God , who knows the heart , testified about them , giving them the Holy Spirit , just like he did to us . ||| Ne Uplerlawna , mak katga riy ihranu ralamni de Ntutg oleka de Nreiniana ira , de Nal walia E Nhiw Lululli la ira , emekwalia maka Nal oleka mai ita .
He made no distinction between us and them , cleansing their hearts by faith . ||| Uplerlawna edonna Naheri-nahelta itor ira , pede Enamou-nawitna ira ihru kdeheni-ralma kdeheni , yoma rpesiay olekwa .
Now therefore why do you tempt God , that you should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear ? ||| Pa dodo'ondi , nihya'pa miwa mikot la mak Yahudi atia ' re , de hota rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni honona , totpa rler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa ? ! Wniarormi-wnialaimi emkade , reiniande hota Uplerlawna Nawenan tiy miy , onnila la'pa mhiopan pa rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni honona , de mial owa'ana kwar werwerat la mak Yahudi atia ' a . Kwar werwerat de it upni-tgarni , me it nek de taken niana takwar nana .
But we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus , just as they are . ||| Yana itsopan pa rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni honona , yoma it tpesiaya onnila Itmatromni Yesus ralam kalwiedni pede itler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa . Mak Yahudi atia ' a nek de emkade wali .
All the multitude kept silence , and they listened to Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God had done among the nations through them . ||| La'pa riy mak kden la yawoka-yale ' u die ema rwun wuenna , Barnabas nora Paulus rwahaur nohora hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a-nyapia la ira kniarni ralamni de , hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini pede riy ema rtaplelleltarga . Hare honona de ir rhi ' nana , yoma Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni la ' a riy mak Yahudi atia ' a .
After they were silent , James answered , Brothers , listen to me . ||| La la'pa rwatia wniahaurnu , noma Yakowsi Nakot la re , Ina-nara ama-hyali mitlina mai a ' u .
Simeon has reported how God first visited the nations to take out of them a people for his name . ||| Simon Petrusa na'nama nakot nohora la ' a ler mak itto'or doini de , Uplerlawna Nala ' ul pua Ntutga plollolli totpa riy ramkeka , de Nreililili-Na'mamuau niana riy maka Yahudi atia ' a . La ' a Uplerlawna wniarorni de , Nala riy dom to ' pa rler wut lia E ' a .
This agrees with the words of the prophets . As it is written , ||| La ' eda de , de naplol memna yoma makwohorulu-ktatrulu ror targ oleka wa . Yoma e rhorat targa emkadi ,
‘ After these things I will return . I will again build the tabernacle of David , which has fallen . I will again build its ruins . I will set it up ||| Hota A'uwali owa'ana . Pa hota A'uriri owa'ana Daud romni mak klitri . Napru'wu-namdierna , ne A'uyapi owa'an la genni .
that the rest of men may seek after the Lord , all the Gentiles who are called by my name , says the Lord , who does all these things . ' ||| Totpena riy korni re honona mana rma rahaka Orgahi-Orha ' a , de riy honona mak Yahudi atia ' a , mak Apuolu pa rler wut mai A ' u . A ' di de Orgahi-Orha ' a . Hadi de A li'ru me hota Aghi ' emkadi .
All of God 's works are known to him from eternity . ||| A'ukot targ olek hadella ululu .
Therefore my judgment is that we do n't trouble those from among the Gentiles who turn to God , ||| Hade emkade , pede awuarora de , yana itsi ' a riy mak Yahudi atia ' re , maka rmai lia Uplerlawna limni ralamni , pa rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni honona , nhi'nande rler la klieratni .
but that we write to them that they abstain from the pollution of idols , from sexual immorality , from what is strangled , and from blood . ||| Mere ita'enyat nieka horta id la ira , pa takot nohora Musa deullu-tatarni ida-woru mak hota rlernohora , de de ya'ana-yemnu mak ha ral oleka la rhoi-rtani uplera-upmati , la ' walia ha ihi mak edonna rotna tiernu de , yana ra'ana , me yan remun rarni . Ne yana ralira-raliai .
For Moses from generations of old has in every city those who preach him , being read in the synagogues every Sabbath . ||| Musa deullu-tatarni ri hare ratlin nana oleka la ' a ler ululu la'pa dodo'ondi . Yoma tatarni de , rpaikia la ' a roma-lewu maka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli de ralamni la ' a Sabat-Sabat lerni , ne ralde'eta la leta-leta re honona .
Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders , with the whole assembly , to choose men out of their company , and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas , Judas called Barsabbas , and Silas , chief men among the brothers . ||| Makodia Uplerlawna lirni , me o'ta-mata krei ror wutga makpesiay Yesus retlia riy ida-woru lia ir mutnu , mak hota rawal lia Antiokia , pa rlidan nohora Paulus nor Barnabas . Noma rwaliria Silas nora Yudas mak ha rpolga la Barsabas . Riy maroro ' a ri de riy orkotkotni-ornananni la maka kpesiay Yesus no ' Yerusalem .
They wrote these things by their hand , The apostles , the elders , and the brothers , to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch , Syria , and Cilicia , greetings . ||| Ral walia horta id pa ra rodia , de lirni emkadilla , La ' a riy honona tiy miy , ina-nara ama-hyali mak kwatiawua hairi-hairi dom to ' a mak Yahudi atia ' a , makpesiay mak kden la Antiokia , Siria me Kilikia . Makodia Uplerlawna lirni amora o'ta-mata krei korni , a hononami makot kalwedo !
Because we have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you with words , unsettling your souls , saying , ‘ You must be circumcised and keep the law , ' to whom we gave no commandment , ||| Amatlina de , riy doma mak kwatiawu ami e rtiy pia rhi ' adwiorin miy , rnairia wniatut wamueheni nhi'nande miy ralammi worworga . Ami edonna mhopna hare .
it seemed good to us , having come to one accord , to choose out men and send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul , ||| Hade pede , amaltier olek pa ampaliri riy mak kmai tiy miy lia hande . Hota rmai die rora Paulus me Barnabas mak kden la a ralam mamni .
men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Paulus me Barnabas di , de er maka edon kwadana matmiati-molmuolu , onnila Itmatromni Yesus Kristus rerieini .
We have sent therefore Judas and Silas , who themselves will also tell you the same things by word of mouth . ||| Amatlin de , riy mak ami edon mhopna rodia wniatut wamueheni tiy miy , pede amala Yudas nora Silas , pa rtiy miy die . Pena ira er mak kakota a lir mamni mak ed walia horat mak irodia de .
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit , and to us , to lay no greater burden on you than these necessary things , ||| Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Natg oleka ne , a miana ampayow nohora , totpena yana amala deulu-tatra mak werwerta , mere amhorat to ' a deulu-tatra ri to ' a .
that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols , from blood , from things strangled , and from sexual immorality , from which if you keep yourselves , it will be well with you . Farewell . ||| Deulu-tatra ri , de yana mi'in nana-miemun nana ya'ana-yemnu , maka ha rodia la nhioi-tniani . Yana mi'ina ha ihi , me yana miemun rar maka kwatiawua nhiuri-wnia'ana mak edonna rotna tiernu me rkokia apannu . Me olietmi la yalira-yaliai . La la'pa olietmi la maka amakota ri , de miy miplol olekwa . Emkade nek wa pa it kalwiedni .
So , when they were sent off , they came to Antioch . Having gathered the multitude together , they delivered the letter . ||| Noka rano ' a-ra'atga maka ha rhopan re pa nhorwua , na'nama maka ha rhopna re rla'awa la Antiokia . La'pa rte'ewa , noma rpolg awoka makpesiay Yesus mutnu honona , na'nama rala horat de .
When they had read it , they rejoiced over the encouragement . ||| La'pa makpesiay Yesus re rpaikia horat de , rahepur nohora meman la horat de lirni . Yoma horta lirni nla ' nana ir ralamni .
Judas and Silas , also being prophets themselves , encouraged the brothers with many words and strengthened them . ||| Yudas nor Silas mana nhi'inde rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu pede ir wal pia raltieri plalahwa memna totpena rodia amni-hyalli inni-narni re la ga ' a pa rparani .
After they had spent some time there , they were dismissed in peace from the brothers to the apostles . ||| La'pa Yudas nora Silas rwarin tiar pua lera na'ida-naworu , noma riy makpesiay lia Antiokia re , rhopn owa'ana rora rawal lia Yerusalem , me rano ' a la'pa rwak kalwieda la mak khopna ira re .
But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch , teaching and preaching the word of the Lord , with many others also . ||| Noka Paulus nora Barnabas rwarin tiar wual lia Antiokia , rwatutu-rwaye'ela Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni-tunnu rora riy liawanni mak kden hande .
After some days Paul said to Barnabas , Let 's return now and visit our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord , to see how they are doing . ||| Noma lera ida ne Paulus nakot la Barnabas niwra , Hyalia , mai pia tawalia pa ttomra-tnaha it inni-narni makpesiay Yesus la ' a leta-leta honona , mak itakot nohora oleka Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni , totpena tamkek teka emkameni la ira .
Barnabas planned to take John , who was called Mark , with them also . ||| Barnabas ralamni la teman la ' Yohansi maka rwet walia Markus pa nodia .
But Paul did n't think that it was a good idea to take with them someone who had withdrawn from them in Pamphylia , and did n't go with them to do the work . ||| Mere , Paulus nwarora de yan rodia Markusa , yoma ululu de Markus nahmena nora ir pa rkar wiutu pede nal tar olek ir la ' a Pamfilia .
Then the contention grew so sharp that they separated from each other . Barnabas took Mark with him and sailed away to Cyprus , ||| Noma Paulus nora Barnabas rawenan pa , nhi'nande rora rwahakar talla . Barnabas npolga Markus pa rrora rhopal la Siprus .
but Paul chose Silas and went out , being commended by the brothers to the grace of God . ||| Mere Paulus na'ala Silas pa nora talla . Edonna rla ' ma'ta de ama-hyali , ina-nar no ' hande rsumbaini , pa rala irrora la Orgahi-Orha ' a limni ralamni .
He went through Syria and Cilicia , strengthening the assemblies . ||| Noma rloh doin momuoga Siria nora Kilikia . Rrora rhi ' aruri riy mak kden la hande pesiayni .
He came to Derbe and Lystra , and behold , a certain disciple was there , named Timothy , the son of a Jewess who believed , but his father was a Greek . ||| Noka Paulus nodi liarni la Derbe nhorwua noma , Listra . La hande de , riy ida mak kpesiay Yesus nwawa Timotius . Inni de pat Yahudi ida makpesiay oleka Yesus mere amni de makden Yunani .
The brothers who were at Lystra and Iconium gave a good testimony about him . ||| La ' a riy mak kpesiay mak kden la Listra me Ikonium , de rwetwet nek la Timotius nanni , yoma ralamni kalwieda .
Paul wanted to have him go out with him , and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those parts , for they all knew that his father was a Greek . ||| Paulus ralamni nod lia Timotius pa nora talla . Hade pede Paulus nsunta Timotius . Nhi ' eda de yoma riy Yahudi mak kden la gen die honona ratga de Timotius de amni de makden Yunani .
As they went on their way through the cities , they delivered the decrees to them to keep which had been ordained by the apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem . ||| La ' a leta-leta maka ha rtomra-rnah ' a re , de rakot nohora lira maka makodi Uplerlawna lirni ror wutga o'ta-mata krei la Yerusalem ha ret tiarg oleka re , la ' a hya ' maka yana ra'ana-remnu , me oliet ir la yalira-yaliai , totpena ina-ama ama-hyali makpesiay oleka re rlernohora hya ' maka ha rhi ' targ oleka re .
So the assemblies were strengthened in the faith , and increased in number daily . ||| La ' hade pede makpesiay Yesus re pesiayni yeher to ' a pa naruri-na'orta , ne lera-ler nekpa makpesiay re rma ra'ititar rer lia liawanni .
When they had gone through the region of Phrygia and Galatia , they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia . ||| Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli edonna Nwayow nohora Paulus nora Silas ra rhakra Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ' a Asia yapatni . Pede yala'ani re rodi liarni la noha Firgia me Galatia .
When they had come opposite Mysia , they tried to go into Bithynia , but the Spirit did n't allow them . ||| La'pa rte'ela ' Misia nhiakarni noma riwra rler la Bitinia yapatni , mere Yesus Nhiw Lululli Nleretia pa yana rla hande .
Passing by Mysia , they came down to Troas . ||| Hade pede rleretia Misia pa rodi liarni la Troas .
A vision appeared to Paul in the night . There was a man of Macedonia standing , begging him and saying , Come over into Macedonia and help us . ||| Nmel nana la Troas , dewade Paulus ndarat nana Makedonia mniotni riy ida naprir lia e gaini pa nwak lilili-mamuau lia niwra , Ee , mtiulan pa mmuai handi pa mtiulan mai ami !
When he had seen the vision , immediately we sought to go out to Macedonia , concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the Good News to them . ||| La'pa ndarat nan hade , noma ampahi ' a-mpayodi pia amodi liar mamni la Makedonia . Yoma la ' a a hmuakur mamni amparora-mpalai die , Uplerlawna Nhopna ami er mak kakot nohora Kot Kalwiedni la riy mak kden hande .
Setting sail therefore from Troas , we made a straight course to Samothrace , and the day following to Neapolis , ||| Amto'or la Troas me amhopal pa modi liarni la Samotrake . Ne repar noma amla'awa la ' a Napolis .
and from there to Philippi , which is a city of Macedonia , the foremost of the district , a Roman colony . We were staying some days in this city . ||| Ampatiawu hande pa amla'awa letlawna Pilipi , la Makedonia yapatni . Pilipi de lodna-hairi Roma yapatni . Amparin tiar lia hande lera ida-wor wuali .
On the Sabbath day we went outside of the city by a riverside , where we supposed there was a place of prayer , and we sat down and spoke to the women who had come together . ||| La'pa la'awa Sabat lerni , noma amla'awa gerlawna aratni la ' a leta puohrani wali tio'ora , yoma amna'erit nana la hande , de Yahudi kniola tieru-niawur nehla genni etla . La ' a gen die wal pia amamtatnami , ne amora patke ' mak kawok la gen die pa maltieri .
A certain woman named Lydia , a seller of purple , of the city of Thyatira , one who worshiped God , heard us . The Lord opened her heart to listen to the things which were spoken by Paul . ||| La ' a patke ' a honona re , de riy id de rpolga la Lidia , makdena Tiatira ne kniarni de na'olu-nala ' a kok ungu mak welli werta . Patke ' di nhi'inde nkola tieru-nawur nehla la Uplerlawna . Noma Itmatromni hihi'ini-yapyapni pa nreiniana hya ' maka Paulus ha nwatutu-nwaye ' a la e ' a .
When she and her household were baptized , she begged us , saying , If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord , come into my house and stay . So she persuaded us . ||| E nor wutga rompalli honona re pa rharania . Nhiaranni nhorwua , noma Lidia nakot mai ami , Nar miy re , la'pa miatga toto ' memna a ' di de riy mak kpesiay Yesus id a ' u , de mtiulan pa tla tlola a ro'mu nayanni pleini . Nwakwak nekpa totpa amlola romni nayanni , pede ampayow pa mlernohora wakwakni .
As we were going to prayer , a certain girl having a spirit of divination met us , who brought her masters much gain by fortune telling . ||| La ' a lera ida , amiwa mla mkola tieru-mawur nehla noma ampatrom nana patke ' ata-wa'ara ida . Patke ' de hegana nhu'ru ralma pa natu nakwiet nana hya'-hya ' mak hota ktai ita , nhi'nande riy ral kupan la pede nodia unut lawan la upni-matromni re .
Following Paul and us , she cried out , These men are servants of the Most High God , who proclaim to us a way of salvation ! ||| Hararar de nlernohor reria amor Paulus pa nhaunu-nhaunu niwra , Hoi , hari de , Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kdella tutullu-lolo'oni hopopanni hari . Ha rmai pia rakot nohora loi-talla plele'era la ina-nara miy , totpena mlier la mormiori-lewlewna .
She was doing this for many days . But Paul , becoming greatly annoyed , turned and said to the spirit , I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her ! It came out that very hour . ||| La'pa lera wo'ir meman pa hararar de polpuolu-hawaunia . Noma Paulus nwarora de lawan rehi , dewade Paulus napal tieman pa nakot la , Ee , hegana mak khu'ru ralma patke ' di , agala Yesus Kristus pa aghokar doin o ' la ' a hararar di ralamni . La ' a mtatan de nekpa , hararar de nhiu'ru ralamni ema rho'or doinia la .
But when her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone , they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers . ||| La'pa upni-matromni re rwarora de hota ir edonna rlernan kupan wa , noma rte ' l la Paulus nor Silas pa ri'ita la ya'olu-yala ' a geni , pa rodia la makodi plolli totpa retlia ra'ursia halli .
When they had brought them to the magistrates , they said , These men , being Jews , are agitating our city ||| Rodia Paulus nora Silas pa rottiarga la o'ta-mata hairi Roma . Noma rakot la re , Ri ' a ri , makden Yahudi re . Rma rkokna-rrarin la let di .
and advocate customs which it is not lawful for us to accept or to observe , being Romans . ||| Yoma rawewal wal riy pa rala nhiolli-lietni me deullu-tatarni pa rarehia deulu-tatra makden Roma ita . Mere ira deullu-tatarni de yan tatlin la , me yana tlernohora .
The multitude rose up together against them and the magistrates tore their clothes from them , then commanded them to be beaten with rods . ||| Riy rahu re wal pia rho'or temna Paulus nor Silas , ne o'ta-mata hairi Roma wal pia rhopan pa riy rlihira-rnaiya rrora naniayarni me rwanalga re .
When they had laid many stripes on them , they threw them into prison , charging the jailer to keep them safely . ||| Rwanalu rrora pa nhor nioma , rwi'ita rrora la roma nhio'la . Noma rhopan pa makhi ' a o'tani la roma nhio'la , natiak matmiat memna re .
Having received such a command , he threw them into the inner prison and secured their feet in the stocks . ||| Yoma mak katiaka roma nhio'la o'tani namta'ata o'ta-mat leta lira nhiopanni , pa nreiniande la nwi'it wutu Paulus nora Silas la kokio'oni . Ne rnairi ranti pa rwutga rrora lakni .
But about midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God , and the prisoners were listening to them . ||| La'pa edon nhal de , mela letargara Paulus nora Silas rtepartarlia sniumbaini , me ramuki-rahepur la wniahniara pa ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna ne riy mak ha rho'la taru re korni mana e ratlin rer wiali .
Suddenly there was a great earthquake , so that the foundations of the prison were shaken , and immediately all the doors were opened , and everyone 's bonds were loosened . ||| Plinu-plinnianamde noha nruru , upkarururu la'pa roma nhio'la wniatatgenni mana nwo'la-nwaini . Roma nhio'la nhiarni honona ema rhar tiar momuoga , ne riy honona mak ha rranit taru re mana ema rwe'er doin momuoga .
The jailer , being roused out of sleep and seeing the prison doors open , drew his sword and was about to kill himself , supposing that the prisoners had escaped . ||| Mak khi ' roma nhio'la o'tani nhed pua namat wa . La'pa namkek nana nhiari honona rahniari , dewade nleh dioinia wehla plalahwani pa niwa nwen inonni , yoma natnieka riy mak kahnio'la honona rawlar olekwa .
But Paul cried with a loud voice , saying , Do n't harm yourself , for we are all here ! ||| Mere Paulus npolliohora , nhaun pa nakot la , Ee , yana mpuen inonmu . A hononami erla handi .
He called for lights , sprang in , fell down trembling before Paul and Silas , ||| Roma nhio'la o'tani nwak ai hulu pa nawlar lia rialma , ne ndiwra-nda'al pa nwaltior tar lia Paulus nora Silas gaini ralamni .
brought them out , and said , Sirs , what must I do to be saved ? ||| Noma la nodia pa rlergota na'nama nakot la re , Upa-matrom miy re , hota hya ' mak aghi ' a totpena alier la mormiori-lewlewna la ' Uplerlawna gaini ralamni ?
They said , Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ , and you will be saved , you and your household . ||| Paulus nora Silas rwahla lirni , Ama , mpuesiaya Itmatromni Yesus pa hota ommuori-mliewna , muor wutga rommu mniotni honona .
They spoke the word of the Lord to him , and to all who were in his house . ||| Noma Paulus nora Silas rakot nohora Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni-tunnu la ' a roma nhio'la o'tani de , nor wutga romni mniotni honona .
He took them the same hour of the night and washed their stripes , and was immediately baptized , he and all his household . ||| Noma la ' mel de meman nekpa makhi ' o'tani la roma nhio'la de nodia ir la ' pa nohma dodioinia no'oni-rarni re kdeheni-ktiahlani . Nhorwua noma rharan miemna hare honona mak kden la rom de nayanni .
He brought them up into his house and set food before them , and rejoiced greatly with all his household , having believed in God . ||| Nhorwua noma nodia Paulus nora Silas pa rla ' pa nhoi-ntania ya'ana-yemun la e romni . E nor wutga romni mniotni honona , ralamni re rahepur memna yoma rpesiaya oleka Uplerlawna .
But when it was day , the magistrates sent the sergeants , saying , Let those men go . ||| Repardoin , dewade o'ta-mata hairi Roma rhopan pa makodi keki-rautu rla rakot la totpena Paulus nora Silas rlergot la roma nhio'la ralamni .
The jailer reported these words to Paul , saying , The magistrates have sent to let you go , now therefore come out and go in peace . ||| Makhi ' o'ta la roma nhio'la geni nodia kot della Paulus pa nakot la , A o'ta-mat mamni , rhopan pa rollia u'pu-matro'mu la handi . Mlia'awa ler di wa . Mliola kalwiedni .
But Paul said to them , They have beaten us publicly without a trial , men who are Romans , and have cast us into prison ! Do they now release us secretly ? No , most certainly , but let them come themselves and bring us out ! ||| Mere Paulus nakot la makodi keki-rautu re , Eh , Am di de makden lodna-hairi Roma molanni ami , mere edonna mhiudi-mpiar wali ami . Amlernana liwliwra-kakaklu la mutlialawna gaini ralamni , nhor nioma mrianti wali am lia roma nhio'la ralamni . Ne rhopan pa amla'awa , de edonna rkokan nohora ami ? ! Amahmena . Mhiopan pa o'ta-matmi re rmeh ' a rmai handi pa ralgot ami !
The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates , and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans , ||| Makodi keki-rautu re rla rakot lira rella o'ta-mata hairi Roma re . La'pa ratlin nana Paulus nor Silas , de lodna-hairi Roma upni-a'nani hare , dewade o'ta-mata re ramta'at wenna yoma hya ' maka ir rhi ' a re edon lol Roma deullu-tatarni .
and they came and begged them . When they had brought them out , they asked them to depart from the city . ||| Noma rla ' pa ruh ' idma-rrama liar la Paulus nora Silas , na'nama ralgota rrora la roma nhio'la de ralamni , na'nama rwak la pa rlergot la let de .
They went out of the prison and entered into Lydia 's house . When they had seen the brothers , they encouraged them , then departed . ||| Paulus nora Silas rto'or la roma nhio'la , dewade rlola Lidia romni . La'pa rrora makpesiay re rwatrom la hande , noma ral owa'ana nnio ' a-niat lia totpena rhi ' aruri ir pesiayni . Nhor nioma Paulus nora Silas rwaran wa .
Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia , they came to Thessalonica , where there was a Jewish synagogue . ||| Paulus nora Silas rla ' pa rodi liarni , la ' pa rlola Ampipolis me Apolonia noma rte'ela Tesalonika . La hande de , gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli etla .
Paul , as was his custom , went in to them , and for three Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures , ||| Pede Paulus nla ' a krei die emolmolan wali maka nhi'inde e nhi ' a la Sabat lerni totpa nora mak kden hande rwahu'ru ralma-riora no ' Puka ralamni . Noma enhi ' nan emkade la ' a krei wotel ralamni . Nhapar rer lia hya ' mak rakot targa la Puka ralamni
explaining and demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer and rise again from the dead , and saying , This Jesus , whom I proclaim to you , is the Christ . ||| pa nwe'er nohora memna niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyal miy re , Ray Makamori-Kalewan mak Uplerlawna Nano'tar die Mesias , Uplerlawna Netlia pa hota Nler la yatlorni-yatra'ani pa Nmati , la'pa Nmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni emekto ' a rakot nohora la Puka ralamni . Ina-nara ama-hyali , dodo'ondi a'ukot tiy miy die , Yesus de Ray Makamori-Kalewna inhatta .
Some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas , of the devout Greeks a great multitude , and not a few of the chief women . ||| Noma riy Yahudi wo'ira rpesiaya pa rlernohora Paulus nora Silas , me emkade wal lia riy Yunani mutlialawna mak ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna me patke ' a liawanni wali maka nhi'inde riy rwetwet ir nanni orang penting .
But the unpersuaded Jews took along some wicked men from the marketplace and gathering a crowd , set the city in an uproar . Assaulting the house of Jason , they sought to bring them out to the people . ||| Mere Yahudi korni re ralamni ramehra rer lia . Rpol wutga riy nhiol yata mak kdella ya'olu-yala ' genni totpa rhi ' a kokokna-rariarni . Pede letlawan de tetema kokokna-rariarnia , ne rawlar pia rler temna riy makpesiay id romni , nwawa Yason pa rahaka Paulus nora Silas totpena rodgiota la tio'ora , pa rapalia la ' mutlialawna .
When they did n't find them , they dragged Jason and certain brothers before the rulers of the city , crying , These who have turned the world upside down have come here also , ||| Mere la'pa edonna rwatrom nana Paulus nor Silasa , noma rte'la la Yason , me makpesiay riy wo'ir wal pia rodia pa ra'ita la o'ta-mata makodi plolli la let de . Rhaun pa riwra , Am miy re , hari er mak khi ' a kokokna-rariarin la ' meni-meni . Dodo'ondi de , rmai wialia it letni di .
whom Jason has received . These all act contrary to the decrees of Caesar , saying that there is another king , Jesus ! ||| Ne Yason mana nreinian wali olek ir wa pa rden la romni . Ir honona edonna rlernohora deulu-tatra maka Kaisar ray Roma ha ntatar targ oleka la maiye lodna-hairi Roma , yoma irakota riwra , Ray id ed ma'ta de nwawa Yesus .
The multitude and the rulers of the city were troubled when they heard these things . ||| Lirni re rhi'nande riy rahu rora o'ta-mata makodi plolli la let de , pa rler wut niohora ira , totpa ralamni ramehra rer lia Paulus nor Silasa .
When they had taken security from Jason and the rest , they let them go . ||| Hade pede o'ta-mat leta rhopan pa Yason nor wutga makpesiay korni re pa ral kupna ra rmolu-rmati , totpena rolin doinia ir la .
The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea . When they arrived , they went into the Jewish synagogue . ||| La ' a mel de meman pa makpesiay lia let de rhopan pa Paulus nor Silas rla'awa Berea . Rla'awa noma la'pa rte'ewa dewade , Paulus nor Silas rokria gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli .
Now these were more noble than those in Thessalonica , in that they received the word with all readiness of mind , examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so . ||| Riy mak kden la Berea rreh wialia makden Tesalonika yoma ral toto ' memna ralam kalwiedni pa rreiniana Uplerlawna lirni pa rahepur memna la yatlina , me lera-ler nekpa rpaik la Puk lawna , totpena rat niohora walia hya ' maka Paulus ha nwatutu-nwaye ' a re raplola .
Many of them therefore believed , also of the prominent Greek women , and not a few men . ||| Hade pede riy Yahudi harahu mak kden hande rpesiaya . Patke ' Yunani liawanni maka rwetwet la nanni re , me muanke ' a Yunani liawanni rpesiay wali .
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also , they came there likewise , agitating the multitudes . ||| La'pa Yahudi mak kden la Tesalonika ratlin nana Paulus e nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ' a Berea , dewade rmai wia Berea pa rawewla rirahu rpa rawenan la Paulus .
Then the brothers immediately sent out Paul to go as far as to the sea , and Silas and Timothy still stayed there . ||| Pleta-plet pa makpesiay Yesus mak kden la Berea rhopan pa riy wo'ira rlidan nohora Paulus la ' eni wawannu , pa rokru leta Atena , ne Silas nora Timotius de rwarin tiar lia Berea .
But those who escorted Paul brought him as far as Athens . Receiving a commandment to Silas and Timothy that they should come to him very quickly , they departed . ||| La'pa rottiarga Paulus la Atena , noma mak klidan nohora re rawal lia Berea , me rodia Paulusa nnio'oni la Silas nor Timotius de niwra , Hyal miy re , pleta-plet pa mimrio ' a mai pia mhiapartikil nohor a ' u .
Now while Paul waited for them at Athens , his spirit was provoked within him as he saw the city full of idols . ||| La'pa Paulus e nwei reria Silas nora Timotius la ' Atena de ralamni nmayo ' a , yoma namkek la let de , de npenpuen niohora atiehra maka ha rhoi-rtania .
So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons , and in the marketplace every day with those who met him . ||| La hade pede la ' a gen miaka Yahudi rhi ' kreini-iskolli , Paulus nora Yahudi re rwahu'ru ralma-rior wut wual lia Yunani mak ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna . Emkade wal lia ' gen miaka ha ra'olu-rala ' a la mana Paulus nora makden hande , rwahu'ru ralma-rior la lera-ler neka .
Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also were conversing with him . Some said , What does this babbler want to say ? Others said , He seems to be advocating foreign deities , because he preached Jesus and the resurrection . ||| Makwatutu-kwaye'ela mak kor la Epikuros , me mak kor la Stoa , rora Paulusa rawahla lira . Ir wokni de idma nakot la ida riwra , Ee , riy di yatnu oke ' a nmeh ' to ' a , mere nurnu lawna . Ha nakot nohora hya ' a ? Dom rakot wali , Yanhi'pa hadi e nakot nohora nhioi-tniania uplera-upmati hairi dom to ' a ? Rakot emkade , yoma Paulus nwahaur nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a Yesus , me la ' walia tmori owa'an la matmiati ralamni .
They took hold of him and brought him to the Areopagus , saying , May we know what this new teaching is , which you are speaking about ? ||| Noma rodia Paulus pa rla'awa wniatrom genni la ' a wo'or ku ' a . Gen die rweta la Areopagus . Rakot la Paulus la hande , riwra , Tuna , amiwa mat wualia wniatutga warwuar muaka omukota re .
For you bring certain strange things to our ears . We want to know therefore what these things mean . ||| Yoma hya ' maka omukota re de , amatlina , mere edonna nla ' a wniaror mamni . Hade pede mukot teka nnia'eratni .
Now all the Athenians and the strangers living there spent their time in nothing else , but either to tell or to hear some new thing . ||| Rakot emkade , yoma riy honona mak kden la Atena di , me do'ona-dakna mak kden hande , nhi'inde ramtatan mamain pa ratlina wniatutu-wniaye ' a maka na'nama iratlin nana noma rwahaur nohor walia .
Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus and said , You men of Athens , I perceive that you are very religious in all things . ||| Noma Paulus naprir lia riy mak kawok tar lia Areopagus de gaini , noma Paulus nakot la re , Ama-hyal miy re , miy hononmi makden Atena miy . A'umkeka de la ' miy wniehwami-liakatmi la ' a hya'-hya ' to ' a , miy agammi de , edonna mhioratdoinia .
For as I passed along and observed the objects of your worship , I also found an altar with this inscription , ‘ TO AN UNKNOWN GOD . ' What therefore you worship in ignorance , I announce to you . ||| A'ulala ' pa a'umkek la miy letmi di walli-walli de , umkek nana gen miaka mhioi-mtiania uplera-upmati . A'umkek wal lia ' geni ida , de katri'ana ida . La katri'ana de rhorat targa riwra , Rala la Uplerlawna maka it edon tat niohora . Ina-nara ama-hyali , Uplerlawna maka mkiola tieru-miawur nehla la , mere edonna miat niohora de , Hade ed maka a'ukota la miy .
The God who made the world and all things in it , he , being Lord of heaven and earth , does n't dwell in temples made with hands . ||| E ' ed mak Na'ohi-na'ara nohkerkeran di nor wutga mniotni honona . E ' de Orgahi-Orha ' a maka liwangenni ntut lia lyanti , me lia'arni nhapar rer lia nohkerna . E ' edonan Ndella roma-roma nhioi-tniani uplera-upmati maka rimormiori rhi ' nana .
He is n't served by men 's hands , as though he needed anything , seeing he himself gives to all life and breath and all things . ||| Me E ' edonna Nwak pa rimormiori rhima-rre ' E ' a , yoma E ' nampena mak kala aran mormiori , me hare honona la ' a rimormiori .
He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the surface of the earth , having determined appointed seasons and the boundaries of their dwellings , ||| Ntawua rimormiori o'ta watu ida , nwawa Adam E ' Nhi ' a hairi-hairi honona , ne Nhi ' pa riy rholi-rlet la nohkerkeran di wawannu tetema . E ' wal pia ed maka ketlia ululu , moweni hota rmor lia , me rmati , me hota rdella hanmeni .
that they should seek the Lord , if perhaps they might reach out for him and find him , though he is not far from each one of us . ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' a-nyap hare totpena la'pa rimormiori e rwahak E ' a , de hota irwatrom nan E ' a la ' a ler maka irwahaka . Mere plolli de , Uplerlawna edon olieta mai it inonni .
‘ For in him we live , move , and have our being . ' As some of your own poets have said , ‘ For we are also his offspring . ' ||| Emeka nhi'inde riy rakota riwra , Itden la nohkeran di pa tmormiori , yoma E ' ed mak kodi plolli mai ita . Emekwalima mak katu khorta puka , makden Atena di riwra , It hononit di , E a'nani ita .
Being then the offspring of God , we ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold , or silver , or stone , engraved by art and design of man . ||| Ama-hyali miy re , onnila Uplerlawna a'nani ita , pa yana twarora de Uplerlawna emekwalia uplera-upmati maka ra ' nana la leli-maha , la ' walia watu maka rimormiori rhi ' a pa rtot nohora yatnu pa rakoki-rayap niana .
The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked . But now he commands that all people everywhere should repent , ||| La ' lera maka itto'or doin de , ita hihi'ini-yapyapni podku-padku maka tsi ' nana yoma taplin niohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , de Uplerlawna Nhortapling oleka la , mere dodo'ondi , Enhopan pa riy honona rhoitio'ora-rtahnei dioinia do'oni-halli .
because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained , of which he has given assurance to all men , in that he has raised him from the dead . ||| Yoma Enet tiarg olek la ' lera ida , de hota Enhudia noheri woru-lyanti nayanni la ' a watghudi lokarni-npara la tatiaili lahannu . Uplerlawna Ntutg oleka riy ida pa hota Nhi ' mak ktoran watghudi die . Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana oleka riy de la ' a matmiatni ralamni totpena riy honona ratga de Uplerlawna ed maka Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a riy de .
Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead , some mocked , but others said , We want to hear you again concerning this . ||| Noka la'pa riy re ratlin nana hota riy rmori owa'an la matmiati ralamni , dewade riy dom la hande rahe ' i-ramalia Paulus . Mere dom pal pia riwra , Tuna , ampak owa'an pa mpuahauria .
Thus Paul went out from among them . ||| Mere Paulus nwatlirni pa rrena pleini , nhor nioka nla'awa .
But certain men joined with him and believed , including Dionysius the Areopagite , and a woman named Damaris , and others with them . ||| Mere la ' hande wal pia riy doma e rlernohora Paulus me rpesiaya Yesus . Ir de de Dionisius , id la o'ta-mat Areopagus me patke ' a id nanni Damaris ne riy dom pali .
After these things Paul departed from Athens and came to Corinth . ||| Nhorwua noma Paulus nlergot la Atena , ne nla'awa la leta Korintus .
He found a certain Jew named Aquila , a man of Pontus by race , who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla , because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome . He came to them , ||| La hande , Paulus nwatrom nana Yahudi ida nwawa Akwila , maka rmor lia Pontus . Akwila di de na'nama nwatiawua Italia pa nora patke'eni Priskila rmai . Rmai wia Korintus , yoma Kaisar ray Klaudius nhopna Yahudi honona rhargot la letlawna Roma . Noma Paulus la ntomar la irrora .
and because he practiced the same trade , he lived with them and worked , for by trade they were tent makers . ||| Nhi'noka nden wut lia hare pa rkar wiutu , yoma rora Paulus mensiarni re ramneneha . Kniarni re nhi'inde rala ha ulti pa rhi ' a larma .
He reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath and persuaded Jews and Greeks . ||| La'pa nhi'inde Sabat lerni , Paulus nla ' mamain pa nor mak kden la gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli de rwahu'ru ralma-riorni . Paulus nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni , totpena nhi ' a Yahudi rora mak Yahudi atia ' a rpa rpesiaya Yesus .
When Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia , Paul was compelled by the Spirit , testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ . ||| La'pa Silas nora Timotius rwatiawu Makedonia pa rmai wia , dewade lera-ler nekpa Paulus nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la ' a riy Yahudi niwra , Ina-nara ama-hyal miy re , Yesus de ed mak Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori .
When they opposed him and blasphemed , he shook out his clothing and said to them , Your blood be on your own heads ! I am clean . From now on , I will go to the Gentiles ! ||| Mere nhi'inde riy Yahudi rhi ' amola-ma ' a mamainia , pede Paulus nkakan doini awu la naniayarni , totpa nhi'pa nakot la re , Hoi , la'pa mlier la Uplerlawna niukamnu , de orgahami to ' a . A ' g edon gor la . Ler di pa nla nodi liarni de alia ' uhak neka makden Yahudi atia ' a .
He departed there and went into the house of a certain man named Justus , one who worshiped God , whose house was next door to the synagogue . ||| Hade pede Paulus nhoitio'or la ira , dewade la ' pa nwatutu-nwaye'ela roma ida mak kden la gen miaka Yahudi re rhi ' kreini-iskolli de walli . Orrom de , de riy mak kola tieru-kawur nehla la Uplerlawna , me Yahudi atia ' de . Rpol nianni de Titius Yustus .
Crispus , the ruler of the synagogue , believed in the Lord with all his house . Many of the Corinthians , when they heard , believed and were baptized . ||| Mere Krispus , makla ' o'tani la krei nor wutga romni mniotni de , me makden Korintus riy rahu wal pia , la'pa ratlin nana kot maka Paulus ha nakot de , rpesiaya Itmatromni Yesus nhor nioka rharania .
The Lord said to Paul in the night by a vision , Do n't be afraid , but speak and do n't be silent , ||| La'pa la mela ida , Paulus ndarat nana lira ida , de nwatiawua Orgahi-Orha ' a de Nakot la Paulus , Paulus ee ! Yan mumta'ata . Mpuahaur pa nodi liarni , yana mrie'nu .
for I am with you , and no one will attack you to harm you , for I have many people in this city . ||| Yoma A ' g e gor o ' talla . Riy id mana hota edonna nheik la inonmu . Mpuahaur pa nodi liarni yoma la ' a let di , de rimormiori liawanni hota rmai lia A li'mu ralamni .
He lived there a year and six months , teaching the word of God among them . ||| La hade pede Paulus nden nek la ' Korintus pa anni id rehenu . Me nwatutu-nwaye ' a Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ira .
But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia , the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat , ||| Lerni la riy ida nwawa Galio nhi ' a Gubernura la ' a Akhaya , noma makden Yahudi re rla ' lira ida , pa rlewria Paulus pa rodia la watghudi lokarni .
saying , This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the law . ||| Rwaghala Paulus de riwra , Tuna , riy di nawewla riy rahu totpena rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Uplerlawna mere wniatutnu edon nora Musa deullu-tatarni ramneneha .
But when Paul was about to open his mouth , Gallio said to the Jews , If indeed it were a matter of wrong or of wicked crime , you Jews , it would be reasonable that I should bear with you , ||| La'pa Paulus niwra naltieri na'nama Galio nakot la re , Ee Yahudi miy ! La'pa hya ' maka mimikota ri , de lira helkiai-hakpera id hadi , onde lira tniutin leta-wnienan marna id hadi , mana awuei pia mikot lir maranmi .
but if they are questions about words and names and your own law , look to it yourselves . For I do n't want to be a judge of these matters . ||| Mere lir di de , mikot nohora to ' a riy nanni me lirni , me deulu-tatar wamuehemi . Pen orgahami mietlia . A ' g e edonna wuayow nohora miy pia agetlia lira-tunu mak emkadi .
So he drove them from the judgment seat . ||| Noka Galio nhokargota re .
Then all the Greeks seized Sosthenes , the ruler of the synagogue , and beat him before the judgment seat . Gallio did n't care about any of these things . ||| La ' noma rirahu re rtorna Sostenes makla ' a o'tani la krei die , pa rwanalga la mak ktoran watghudi pepanni gaini . Mere Galio edonna nhe'du nan memna ira yahak kahelli-kaha'arni re .
Paul , having stayed after this many more days , took his leave of the brothers , and sailed from there for Syria , together with Priscilla and Aquila . He shaved his head in Cenchreae , for he had a vow . ||| Noma Paulus nalo'on ma'ta la Korintus , dewade nakot tar lia makpesiay nio ' hande pa irwarini , noma e nora Priskila , me Akwila pa rhopal pa rokru Siria . Mere edon rhopal ma'ta de , Paulus liokarni ida la Uplerlawna nhorwua pa , ni'ir doinia moratnu la ' a leta Kengkrea nlernohora Yahudi deullu-tatarni .
He came to Ephesus , and he left them there , but he himself entered into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews . ||| La'pa nte'ela Epsus , noma Paulus naltarga Priskila , me Akwila ne nla'awa Yahudi kreini-iskolli genni pa rwahu'ru ralma-rior wut lia Yahudi mak kden hande .
When they asked him to stay with them a longer time , he declined , ||| Noka Yahudi rwak pa Paulus nalo'on taru plein la hande , mere nahmena .
but taking his leave of them , he said , I must by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem , but I will return again to you if God wills . Then he set sail from Ephesus . ||| La'pa emkade mere e nla'awa , de nakot tar lia re , Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa Uplerlawna Nala a ' pua amuormior die , hota a'uwali owa'an la handi . Noma nawliohor tar pua nha'at la kapli pa nla'awa .
When he had landed at Caesarea , he went up and greeted the assembly , and went down to Antioch . ||| La la ' pa nerun la Kaisarea , noma nla'awa Yerusalem pa npahar tar lia makpesiay Yesus mutnu limni mak kden hande , noma nodi liarni la Antiokia .
Having spent some time there , he departed and went through the region of Galatia and Phrygia , in order , establishing all the disciples . ||| La la'pa nden nek la hande la ' lera ida-woru nhor nioka nla ' pa ntomra-nnah ' a la makden Galatia , me Firgia liewnu totpena nhi ' aruria makpesiay lia hande pesiayni .
Now a certain Jew named Apollos , an Alexandrian by race , an eloquent man , came to Ephesus . He was mighty in the Scriptures . ||| La ler de de , makden Yahudi ida mak ha rmori la ' a leta Aleksandaria nwawa Apolsu , nmai lia leta Epsus . Apolus de riy mak katu pa natu naltieri , me nat niohor memna Puka lirni .
This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord , and being fervent in spirit , he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus , although he knew only the baptism of John . ||| La ' walia rwatutg olek walia pa nat niohora Itmatromni Yesus nhiornu-tnia'anu loini-talanni . Apolus di nwatikil la wniatutu-wniaye ' a la ' Yesus . La'pa nwatutu-nwaye'ela Yesus wniatutnu-wniaye'eni de , edon nhala mere nat niohor to ' a hya ' maka Yohansi nwatutu la ' lera maka nharani riy .
He began to speak boldly in the synagogue . But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him , they took him aside , and explained to him the way of God more accurately . ||| Apolsu nmai pia nwahauru la ' a Yahudi kreini-iskolli geni ralamni de nurnu kerna la ' a ltierni . Ne la'pa Priskila nora Akwila ratlin nana wniatutnu , noma rrora rodia pa rla'awa ir romni na'nama rrora rakot nohora Uplerlawna loini-talanni totpa rhaur la pa rhi ' aplola hya ' a mak nat niohora oleka wa .
When he had determined to pass over into Achaia , the brothers encouraged him , and wrote to the disciples to receive him . When he had come , he greatly helped those who had believed through grace , ||| Nhorwua noma Apolsu niwa nla'awa la Akhaya . Pede makpesiay Yesus la ' a Epsus ntulan la e ' a , de ra'enyatga horat la inni-narni makpesiay no ' Akhaya totpena rreiniana Apolsu . Ne la'pa Apolsu nte'ela Akhaya ntulan memna riy maka Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napalga pa rpesiay olek Yesus wa .
for he powerfully refuted the Jews , publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ . ||| Yoma la ' a nur kieranni , pede Apolsu nala Yahudi rella yawa , pa nterna pniok lirni-pniah ' a wawni re la ' a mutlialawna gaini . Ne Apolsu ntekal reria la ' a hya ' maka ha rhorat targa la Puk lawna ralamni , mak ktutga Yesus de Ray mak Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori .
While Apollos was at Corinth , Paul , having passed through the upper country , came to Ephesus and found certain disciples . ||| La'pa Apolsu nden ma'ta la Korintus , de Paulus nlola Galatia me Firgia pa nmai wial lia Epsus . La hande de , nwatrom nana riy dom pali makpesiay .
He said to them , Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed ? They said to him , No , we have n't even heard that there is a Holy Spirit . ||| Noma natiana re , Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy mrieinian Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli olekwa la ler mak mimpiesiaya ? Noma rwahla lirni , Edonan ma'ta . Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli de ami edonna matlin ma'ta .
He said , Into what then were you baptized ? They said , Into John 's baptism . ||| La'pa emkade de mimpiesiay hya ' a la ' ler mak rharani miy ? Rwahla riwra , Ampesiay hya ' maka Yohansi nwatutga .
Paul said , John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance , saying to the people that they should believe in the one who would come after him , that is , in Christ Jesus . ||| Noma Paulus nakot la , Ina-nara ama-hyali , lerni pa Yohansi ha nharania rira de , nakot la re niwra , Mimhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia oleka do'omi-halmi . Mere Yohansi e nakot walia la riy Israel , niwra , Miy miana mpiesiay walia riy mak ktawli'iru mai a ' di , Hade de Yesus .
When they heard this , they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus . ||| La'pa ratlin nan hade , noma rharania rde la Yesus nanni wawannu .
When Paul had laid his hands on them , the Holy Spirit came on them and they spoke with other languages and prophesied . ||| Ne la'pa Paulus nran limni la ir wawannu de , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la ira , noma rmeh ' a raltiertieria la yawala mak ha raplinu , me rakot nohora kot mak rlernana la Uplerlawna la ' ler de .
They were about twelve men in all . ||| La ' rawok ir de , de la'pa edon nhal de riy termida wehrani woru .
He entered into the synagogue and spoke boldly for a period of three months , reasoning and persuading about the things concerning God 's Kingdom . ||| La ' a wolla wotel ralamni de , Paulus edonna natota-nawawet lia riy ida ne naltier die nto'pi-ngauria lirni la mak kden la Yahudi kreini re , me nor ira rawahla lira totpena nhedu-ntehra ir la ' a hya ' maka e nakot nohora la ' Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emek Ray de naplola .
But when some were hardened and disobedient , speaking evil of the Way before the multitude , he departed from them and separated the disciples , reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus . ||| Mere riy wo'ir erla hande , de rhi ' ralam tehra pa rahmena rpesiaya . La ' a riy honona gaini ralamni , de mak edonna kpesiay re rahe ' i-ramalia hya ' mak ha rwatutu-rwaye ' a re la ' a Uplerlawna , de hota Namori-nalewna rimormiori la ' a Yesus wawannu . La hade pede Paulus nhoitio'or la ira , ne nora makpesiay Yesus pa rla'awa rialam la ' a Tiranus wniatutnu genni . La ' hande de lera-ler nekpa nora mak kden hande rwahu'ru ralma riorni .
This continued for two years , so that all those who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus , both Jews and Greeks . ||| Nhi ' a-nyap niek emkade pa la anni wor muemna , pede harahu rehi mak kden la Asia yapatni la ' a riy Yahudi , me Yahudi atia ' a mana harahu ratlin la Itmatromlawanni lirni-tunnu mak ha rwatut lia re .
God worked special miracles by the hands of Paul , ||| Noma Uplerlawna Nal Paulus pa nodia plolli , totpena hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak edonna tamkek taru mujizat de
so that even handkerchiefs or aprons were carried away from his body to the sick , and the diseases departed from them , and the evil spirits went out . ||| hya ' mak Paulus ha nnairia re emek lenso , rewa , la'pa rod harella mak kamehra-kamau re , de rleretnekpa rkalwied wa me hegana lo'orni-mawalli mana rlergot la riy mak hegana rodi plolli la .
But some of the itinerant Jews , exorcists , took on themselves to invoke over those who had the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus , saying , We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches . ||| La hande de Yahudi maka nhi'inde kalala ' pa rhokra-rlaiya hegana-kawnu , yatni-rha'ani maka khu'ru ralma riy . Ratlin nana Paulus nakot nohora Yesus , na'nama irnair walia Itmatromni Yesus nanni pa ra rhokra hegana-kawnu re , riwra , Amal Yesus nanni maka Paulus nakot nohora pa amhokar miy lia riy di .
There were seven sons of one Sceva , a Jewish chief priest , who did this . ||| Skewa , Yahudi ida , makla ' a imam o'tani-matni ida , a'nani muanke ' a riy wo'itu de mana rnairia Yesus nanni pa ra rhokra hegana-kawnu .
The evil spirit answered , Jesus I know , and Paul I know , but who are you ? ||| Lera ida ne , riwra rnairia Yesus nanni pa rhokar doini hegana-kawnu mak khu'ru ralma riy ida . Mere la'pa rhopan pa hegana-kawnu nlergot la riy de , dewade hegana-kawnu de nakot la riy mandiditu re riwra , Hoi , agat niohora Yesus , me agat niohora walia Paulus . Mere miy di de , he ' miy ? ! Uplerlawna edon Nala rurni-laini pa mhiokargot a ' u .
The man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them , overpowered them , and prevailed against them , so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded . ||| Dewade riy mak ha nhiu'ru ralam de nkarma riy mandiditu re pa ramno ' a-ramrara , me ratliawihi pa rawlar dioinia rom della .
This became known to all , both Jews and Greeks , who lived at Ephesus . Fear fell on them all , and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified . ||| Riy honona la ' a Yahudi me maka Yahudi atia ' a mak khol lia Epsus la'pa ratlin nana hade de honona ramta'at wenna . La hade pede Yesus nanni mana riy ra'unni-ramta'ata rhu'ru-rhelma .
Many also of those who had believed came , confessing and declaring their deeds . ||| Riy rahu mak kpesiay Yesus rmai pia rwahaur nohora do'oni-halli la ' mutlialawna gaini , la ' a hya ' maka rhi ' nan oleka wa .
Many of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all . They counted their price , and found it to be fifty thousand pieces of silver . ||| Yoma nhi'inde nala ' nohora hegana-kawnu me du'ula-we'erni . Noma rawoka pukni re honona , na'nama rtutnia la riy rahu gaini . La'pa rrekan nana puk ku'uni notes re honona welli werta , de kupan maha wawahra riwnu terampwolima , de kupna-kai maka riy termida wehrani wonema rlernana la anni termida .
So the word of the Lord was growing and becoming mighty . ||| Emkadella Uplerlawna Ntutga preheni-mkaini rurni-laini la mak kden hande , pede Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni-tunnu mana nwewar la gen die , me mak kpesiay Uplerlawna lirni re na'ititar rer lia liawanni .
Now after these things had ended , Paul determined in the Spirit , when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia , to go to Jerusalem , saying , After I have been there , I must also see Rome . ||| La ' hade pa nhorwua noma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodia Paulus pa netlia , de hota nleretia Makedonia , me Akhaya pa nodi liarni la Yerusalem . Noka Paulus nakot la makpesiay re , niwra , Hota alia'awa Yerusalem nhor nianpena alia'awa la ' letlawna Roma wali .
Having sent into Macedonia two of those who served him , Timothy and Erastus , he himself stayed in Asia for a while . ||| Noma netlia pa , la ' riy woru mak ktulan la , de Timotius nora Erastus , Paulus nhopan pa rla'awa Makedonia , ne hota e nwarin tiar lia la ' a Asia yapatni lera na'ida-naworu .
About that time there arose no small disturbance concerning the Way . ||| La ' ler de , kniokna-riarin lawna la Epsus , yoma wniatutu-wniaye ' a la ' Yesus loini-talanni .
For a certain man named Demetrius , a silversmith who made silver shrines of Artemis , brought no little business to the craftsmen , ||| Yoma la ' a let de , de riy ida makhuria mah wawahra nwawa Demetrius , nwewla rom ku ' a-lewu ku ' a mak ha rhoi-rtani la upler Artemis . La ' mensiarni de nodia unut lawna la ' a limni-rorni honona .
whom he gathered together with the workmen of like occupation , and said , Sirs , you know that by this business we have our wealth . ||| La ' hade pede , nawoka-nale ' momuowua limni-rorni rora makhuria mah wawahra honona pa nhar lirni , Ama-hyal miy re , miatga la ' a kniar di , pede itlernana kupna-kai .
You see and hear that not at Ephesus alone , but almost throughout all Asia , this Paul has persuaded and turned away many people , saying that they are no gods that are made with hands . ||| Dodo'ondi de , mitlin nohora-miat nohora la ' a Paulus lira kdiorni-kdieheni , de niwra nhioi-tniani miaka rimormiori ha rakoki-rayapi niana re , de hare honona rhala . Ne e ' mana nreinian olek riy liawanni pa rlernohora e wniatutnu-wniaye'eni . Edonna nden la Epsus to'ola handi , mere trema-trema la ' a Asia liewnu wali .
Not only is there danger that this our trade come into disrepute , but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be counted as nothing and her majesty destroyed , whom all Asia and the world worships . ||| Hota ita kniarni de nteri-ntawa , me nodi it la nan yata . Hade edonna nmeh ' a , mere upler Artemis roma nhioi-tniani lawanni wal pia riy edonna rwarekna , me hota riy rwatei-rwahapra upler Artemis tullu-petanni . Hota rhi ' emkade , kennama nhioi-tniani die , ed mak ha ra'uli-rawedia la ' a Asia la'pa noheri woru-lyanti nayanni .
When they heard this they were filled with anger , and cried out , saying , Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! ||| La'pa ratlin nana lirni de , dewade ralamni ramehra pa polpuolu-hawaunia pa riwra , Artemis mmuormiori ! O ' de , a atiehra mamni o ' a , mai Epsus dilla .
The whole city was filled with confusion , and they rushed with one accord into the theater , having seized Gaius and Aristarchus , men of Macedonia , Paul 's companions in travel . ||| La ' pa kniokan lawan de nwewar la letlawna uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani . La ' noma mak kawoka-kale ' pua kokna-rarni re , rtorna riy woru . Id nanni Gayus nora id nanni Aristarkus , yoma ha rora de makden Makedonia mak nhi'inde rora Paulus rala ' wutu . Rodia rrora pa rokria leta yawok genni mak inponni .
When Paul wanted to enter in to the people , the disciples did n't allow him . ||| Noma Paulus niwra nlernohora walia ir rora pa nla'awa rialma , mere mak kpesiay Yesus la hande rahmena .
Certain also of the Asiarchs , being his friends , sent to him and begged him not to venture into the theater . ||| Makhi ' o'ta-mata la ' a Asia yapatni , mak kora Paulus rwatalla re , mana rhopan pa rakot la Paulus totpena yana Paulus nayamkek la gen die .
Some therefore cried one thing , and some another , for the assembly was in confusion . Most of them did n't know why they had come together . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne , mak kawoka-kale ' u re rhi ' a kniokan lawna . Polpuolu-hawaunia mere hya ' maka rhaunu re , de edon ramneneha pa emeka riy mak kga ' u . Riy harahu raplin niohora hya ' maka rerieinian pede irawoka .
They brought Alexander out of the multitude , the Jews putting him forward . Alexander beckoned with his hand , and would have made a defense to the people . ||| Noka Yahudi ral riy ida mak kwawa Aleksander la mutlialawna gaini , totpena nakot nohora Yahudi wniarorni-wnialaini me riy wo'ira nano ' a-na'atga , de hya ' maka hota nakot la re . Noka Aleksander nayer limni la mutlialawna gaini totpena ramolmuolga , totpa nlernana nhiapargeni pia nod niana Yahudi re la plol wawna .
But when they perceived that he was a Jew , all with one voice for a time of about two hours cried out , Great is Artemis of the Ephesians ! ||| Mere la'pa riy harahu re ramkek nana Yahudi eda de , dewade honona rahmena ratlin e lirni pede riarin taru riwra , Uplera-upmati atiehra Artemis mmuormiori ! Makden Epsus aran lawna o ' a ! Rhaunu-rhaunu emkade pa la'pa edon nhal de jam woru .
When the town clerk had quieted the multitude , he said , You men of Ephesus , what man is there who does n't know that the city of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great goddess Artemis , and of the image which fell down from Zeus ? ||| Nhi'noka ama-yei leta mak kwatutu-kwaye ' a leta pa'etnu-parahmani yortulsi nalina-nalera re , noma nakot la re , Ina-nara ama-hyali makden Epsus miy , mhieri tlinmi-mtiatar matmi . Miy hononmi la'pa riy meni-meni miatg oleka , de Epsus nanpena let maka kawilla-kayomtia roma nhioi-tniani Artemis , me atiehra Artemis , de watu lilili-mamuau mak kwatiawu lyanti pa ktuini .
Seeing then that these things ca n't be denied , you ought to be quiet and to do nothing rash . ||| Riy id mana edon nwayotlia hade . Hade pede hononmi yana mkiokna-mriarni .
For you have brought these men here , who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of your goddess . ||| Dodo'ondi miodia oleka ir rora pa mmiai handi , mere a'utian tek miy . Hari mak kreyahru oleka genia ha nhioi-tniani , onde rapolu-raliella upler Artemis pede miodi mmiai a ' u ? ! Mimiatga de hari edon rhi ' hadomdoma .
If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a matter against anyone , the courts are open and there are proconsuls . Let them press charges against one another . ||| Demade , la'pa hadom edon nla ' nana Demetrius nor kniarwalli re ralamni , de rodi nieka lira-tun della ' watghudi lokarni . Yoma o'ta-mata mak ktorna watghudi edonna rwayotlia re .
But if you seek anything about other matters , it will be settled in the regular assembly . ||| Ne la'pa hya ' maka miy ralammi nala pa mhi ' a la lira-tunu de , miodia la o'ta-mata mak nhi'inde rawoka re , totpena rhudia la watghudi lokarni .
For indeed we are in danger of being accused concerning today 's riot , there being no cause . Concerning it , we would n't be able to give an account of this commotion . ||| Yoma la'pa mkiokokna-mriariarni emkadi , de hota o'ta-mata rtut it la mak khala . Ne hota itakleha wniatikilgeni kuku ' pa ta twahaur la .
After the uproar had ceased , Paul sent for the disciples , took leave of them , and departed to go into Macedonia . ||| La'pa kokokna-rariarin lawna la Epsus namtierun wa , noma Paulus nawoka-nale'ga makpesiay Yesus pa nala lira nnio ' a-niat lia re pa nhi ' aruria ir ralamni , nhor diemade nakot tar lia re dewade la ' pa nodi liarni pa nla'awa Makedonia .
When he had gone through those parts and had encouraged them with many words , he came into Greece . ||| Nalala ' pa ntomra-nnah ' a la ' a makden Makedonia liewnu pa nano ' a-na'atga liawanni la makpesiay Yesusa , totpena yana rwadur la pesiayni . Nhorwua noma nodi liarni la Yunani .
When he had spent three months there , and a plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria , he determined to return through Macedonia . ||| Ndella Yunani pia nalo'on nana wolla wotelu . La'pa niwa nhopal la Siria , noma natlin nana makden Yahudi riwa rla ' lir id pa rwen e ' a . La ' hade pede e netlia hota nawali pia la nlola Makedonia .
These accompanied him as far as Asia , Sopater of Beroea , Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians , Gaius of Derbe , Timothy , and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia . ||| Sopater , Pirus a'nani mak kden la Berea la'pa ror rewre'wa Paulus talla . Emkade walia Aristarkus nora Sekundus riy mak kden la Tesalonika , me Gayus makden Derbe , Timotius , Tikhikus me Trofimus riy mak kden la Asia yapatni .
But these had gone ahead , and were waiting for us at Troas . ||| Irala ' ulga am pia rwei lia ' Troas .
We sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread , and came to them at Troas in five days , where we stayed seven days . ||| La la'pa lerlalawna roti mak edonna rnairia tgo ' a nhorwua , noma amhopal pa mto'or doinia Pilipi . Tre ' ma'ta lera wolim pa amawok owa'an la Troas . Amparin tiar lia Troas krei id ralamni .
On the first day of the week , when the disciples were gathered together to break bread , Paul talked with them , intending to depart on the next day , and continued his speech until midnight . ||| Krei lerni pa nmel wa , noma amawok pa ama'an rewre'wa emeka riy nora hyalli . Paulus nora rwahaur wutu , yoma hota repar de eniwa nla'awa . Paulus naltier niande la'pa mela letargara .
There were many lights in the upper room where we were gathered together . ||| La ' kamri gen nio ' heyanna , nniawok gen miamni de , leler momuou lia ' wa'du .
A certain young man named Eutychus sat in the window , weighed down with deep sleep . As Paul spoke still longer , being weighed down by his sleep , he fell down from the third floor and was taken up dead . ||| Tuwari ida nanni Etikhus namtatna la ' a folla . Yoma Paulus wniahaurnu plahwa , noma tuwari die nhoki ntemna pa nanin tar muemna la folla nhi'noka ntuin pa nalla yawa . La rom tutul die dadanni wotelu . La'pa rmai pia irrana , de nmati olekwa .
Paul went down and fell upon him , and embracing him said , Do n't be troubled , for his life is in him . ||| Mere Paulus nerun pa nakowa la tuwari die na'nama nkorreria . Na'nama Paulus niwra , Ee , yan mimta'ata , e nmormior owa'ana .
When he had gone up , had broken bread and eaten , and had talked with them a long while , even until break of day , he departed . ||| Nhor nioma Paulus nha'at owa'an la heyanan pa nhakra roti pia ira'an rewre'wa . Nwahaur pa nodi liarni la repardoin yawyawra , noma Paulus nla'awa .
They brought the boy in alive , and were greatly comforted . ||| Riy rla rottiaru tuwar diella romni yoma nmormior mia'ta , ne ralamni re rahepuepur memna .
But we , going ahead to the ship , set sail for Assos , intending to take Paul aboard there , for he had so arranged , intending himself to go by land . ||| Noma amha'at la kapli totpena amhopal pa mala ' ulga Paulus la leta Asos . Mere Paulus nwaror oleka yala'ani onni , de e nlol keranni . La Asos nanpena Paulus hota nha'at la kapli pa nor rewre'wa ami .
When he met us at Assos , we took him aboard and came to Mitylene . ||| La'pa ampatrom la Asos , noma amora Paulus mha'at la kapli pa amora mhopal pa mla'awa leta Metilene .
Sailing from there , we came the following day opposite Chios . The next day we touched at Samos and stayed at Trogyllium , and the day after we came to Miletus . ||| Amden la hande pa repar wa , dewade amhopal pa amte'ela ' gen miaka kapal reria noha Khios . La'pa walin de amte'ela Samos . Lera id owa'an de amte'ela Miletus .
For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus , that he might not have to spend time in Asia , for he was hastening , if it were possible for him , to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost . ||| Paulus neti olek la , hota edonna nlola Epsus totpena yana nahe ' i miamain la ' a geni-tien mak kden la Asia . Nmahrur niohor totpena pleta-plet pa nla Yerusalem pa nlernana lerlalawna Pentakosta .
From Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called to himself the elders of the assembly . ||| Hade pede Paulus nden la Miletus pa niwa nala nnio ' a la makden Epsus , pede nwaka o'ta-mata la ' makpesiay Yesus pa rma rwatrom e ' a .
When they had come to him , he said to them , You yourselves know , from the first day that I set foot in Asia , how I was with you all the time , ||| La'pa rmai wia dewade Paulus nakot la re , Am miy re , mimiatga emkameni la amuormior di , la ' lera yanulu maka atie'ela Asia la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ler maka awuaran wa .
serving the Lord with all humility , with many tears , and with trials which happened to me by the plots of the Jews , ||| A'ului-unuhru nohora a nhiu'ru-a nhielmu , pa akar lia Itmatromni kniarni . Alier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani la ' a Yahudi wniaror yatyatni mai a ' u .
how I did n't shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable , teaching you publicly and from house to house , ||| Mimiatga de a ' g edonna umta'ata ukota la ' miy , la ' a hya ' mak kodia unut tiy miy . Awuatutu-wuaye ' tiy miy lia ' a yawoka-yale ' u lalawna gaini , me la ' a roma-lewu .
testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus . ||| La'pa Yahudi miy , la'pa Yahudi atia ' a nhi'inde a'ukot mamain tiy miy , totpena mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi totpa mlier la Uplerlawna limni ralamni , me mpiesiaya Itmatromni Yesus Kristus .
Now , behold , I go bound by the Spirit to Jerusalem , not knowing what will happen to me there , ||| Dodo'ondi aliernohora Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli pa alia'awa la Yerusalem , me a'uplinga hota hya ' maka aliernana la hande .
except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city , saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me . ||| Agat tio ' a de , la ' a leta-leta re de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot targ a ' pua hota alia ' a roma nhio'la , me hota alier la kropna-krieutu .
But these things do n't count , nor do I hold my life dear to myself , so that I may finish my race with joy , and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus , to fully testify to the Good News of the grace of God . ||| Mere a ' g edonna wuadan nohora a mormio'ru di , hornama akari ahorga kniar miaka Itmatromni Yesus Nal pa akaria ne , adien rer lia kniari pa la'pa la'awa a mormio'ru hohoni pa ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni de mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna Nhi ' samomuou lia rimormiori .
Now , behold , I know that you all , among whom I went about preaching God 's Kingdom , will see my face no more . ||| Atiomra-niah ' oleka ina-nara ama-hyali hononmi , me a'ukot nohor oleka emkameni la Uplerlawna Nodi plolli emolmolla Ray ida . Dodo'ondi de , a ' g edonna ghe'du nan miy wia , wniatroma-tniahnei edonan mai it wa .
Therefore I testify to you today that I am clean from the blood of all men , ||| La ' hade pede a'ukota ploloi-plele'era la ' miy lia ler di , la'pa miy edon mliernohor a lira-nnio ' u pa hota la ' ler ida mlier la yatyatni-halalli pa rrinnia miy lia ai mormiori ralamni , de orgahami to ' a .
for I did n't shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of God . ||| Yoma a ' g edonna uwlar tiar lia a knia'ru maka a'ukot nohora tiy miy Uplerlawna ralma-riorni honona mak Enhopan pa awuahaur nohora .
Take heed , therefore , to yourselves and to all the flock , in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers , to shepherd the assembly of the Lord and God which he purchased with his own blood . ||| Am miy re , yanin edonna-yamat edonna la ' miy . Ne emolmolla riy mak katiaka nhi'inde natiak reria dumni , hota miy die mpialia riy mak katiaka riy makpesiay Yesus . Hade pede mitiak makpesiay Yesus honona , maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nal oleka la ' miy pia mitiaka . Makpesiay ri , Uplerlawna Nala Wutmueha-Laimieha pa la'pa rtowr riarni , me Nler la matmiati-molmuolu ralamni totpena rla ' E gahani .
For I know that after my departure , vicious wolves will enter in among you , not sparing the flock . ||| Awuaran kuku ' la handi , de hota riy rmai tieman tiy miy . Ne emolmolla ahpuora-ahdiawra rlihir matmata-rhaw riarara , ri ' a re hota rhi ' a yatyat la makpesiay re .
Men will arise from among your own selves , speaking perverse things , to draw away the disciples after them . ||| Ntawua krei mutnu ralamni nekane , riy wo'ir mana hota rakot nohora kot mak kodia lir kdiori . Ir rhi ' emkade , totpena riy makpesiay Yesus rler la klieratni , me rlernohor re .
Therefore watch , remembering that for a period of three years I did n't cease to admonish everyone night and day with tears . ||| La hade pede yan mininmi la yatiaka . Mpiahniorta . La ' a anni wotelu die ului-unuhru . Lera nhaur mela , edon rien a lia nnio ' a-niat tiy miy hononmi . Emkade wal lia hota mitiaka riy makpesiay .
Now , brothers , I entrust you to God and to the word of his grace , which is able to build up and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified . ||| Am miy re , dodo'ondi de agotil miy lia Uplerlawna , totpena E ' ed mak kwilla-kmata miy . Ne totpena mkiol pitpit lia E nehlani totpa yana mhiortaplinga mliernohora E Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni mak Nakot nohora oleka tiy miy wia , de emkameni Nhi ' samomuou mai ita . Uplerlawna ed mak kodi plolli pa Nhi ' aruri miy , ne hota mdiunit nana-mpietur nana ra'ani-pallu mak Enken tiarga la ' a riy mak E Nhi ' la E kamieheni .
I coveted no one 's silver , gold , or clothing . ||| Am miy re , la ' a mormio'ru ralamni atiutg oleka talan tiy miy . Net niana-npat niana a wniaro'ru pa miala kupna-kai , hewewta-naniairi mai a ' u .
You yourselves know that these hands served my necessities , and those who were with me . ||| Ne mimieh ' a miatga de , ndella a ruri-lai wamueh ' u , pa akar ha ulti pa ghi ' a larma pa agala utu'tu agora a mutwua'lu mak klernohora a ' u ya'an mamni-yemun mamni , hewewat mamni-naniair mamni .
In all things I gave you an example , that so laboring you ought to help the weak , and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus , that he himself said , ‘ It is more blessed to give than to receive . ' ||| La ' a hihi ' u-yapya'pu honona de , agal oleka talan tiy miy , de la ' a kniar werwerta emkade de tkar pia tatwaran nana riy mak edonna ktaru me riy mak kakleha ruri . Ne yana tsoratdoini hya ' maka Itmatromni Yesus Nmeh ' a Nakot targ oleka wa , Niwra , Italla riy , hota itlernana Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu liawanni . Mere la'pa twei pia riy ral mai ita de itlernan to ' a Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu oke ' nmeh ' a . Mitlina oleka me mhioratreria it kalwiedni .
When he had spoken these things , he knelt down and prayed with them all . ||| La'pa Paulus nwahaur pa nhorwua , dewade ir honona rewre'wa pa rwaltiora-rwaltieman pa rsumbaini .
They all wept freely , and fell on Paul 's neck and kissed him , ||| Ir honona rko ' a-rkakru me rhedge'du memna , me rkorreria Paulus pa rkinnia yoma niwa nla'awa .
sorrowing most of all because of the word which he had spoken , that they should see his face no more . Then they accompanied him to the ship . ||| Mak kwarini honona ralamni rmawal doin la , yoma Paulus niwra , Hota miy edonna mimkek olek a wua . Noma rlidan nohora pa rottiarga la kapli .
When we had departed from them and had set sail , we came with a straight course to Cos , and the next day to Rhodes , and from there to Patara . ||| Noma amawliohor tar lia o'ta-mata la makpesiay Yesus mutnu makden Epsus re pa amla'awa . Amhopal pa modi liar mamni la noha Kos . Ne repar noka amte'ela noha Rodos . Amdella hande pa mhopal pa amla'awa Patara herni .
Having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia , we went aboard and set sail . ||| La ' a Patara , noma amha'at owa'ana kapli ida mak kiwa kla'awa Fenisia . Ne amhopal pa
When we had come in sight of Cyprus , leaving it on the left hand , we sailed to Syria and landed at Tyre , for the ship was there to unload her cargo . ||| amamkek rer miemna noha Siprus dewade a kapil mamni nhalil niana Siprus la malwiru , mere modia liar mamni pa mdawar reria Siria . Noma kapil mamni natrernia watgornihini pa amerun la Tirus . Kapil mak amodia , nalernia yodni la hande .
Having found disciples , we stayed there seven days . These said to Paul through the Spirit that he should not go up to Jerusalem . ||| La hande pa amla mtomra-mnah ' a riy maka kpesiay lia Yesus , pa amora mparin tiar lia krei id ralamni . Onnila Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot la re , hota Paulus nlernana yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani pede irano ' a-ranatga Paulus , totpena yana la ' a Yerusalem .
When those days were over , we departed and went on our journey . They all , with wives and children , brought us on our way until we were out of the city . Kneeling down on the beach , we prayed . ||| Mere la'pa a ler mamni ntu'tu la hande , noma amaltarga ira , ne mala ' pa amodi liar mamni . Riy makpesiay mak kden hande honona rora hawni-a'nani rlidan nohora am pia amler la leta herni wali tio'ora . A honona mpaltiora-mpaltiemna la ' a eni ga'arni pa msumbaini .
After saying goodbye to each other , we went on board the ship , and they returned home again . ||| Nhorwua noma am idma nawliohor targ id pa irwarini , ne amha'at la kapli . Noma honona re rla'awa la ir romni nayanni .
When we had finished the voyage from Tyre , we arrived at Ptolemais . We greeted the brothers and stayed with them one day . ||| Noka ampatiawu Tirus pa ammai wia la ' a Ptolemais . La ' hande de amla mtomra-mnah ' a mutwual miamni makpesiay , totpa am idma nawliohor tar lia ida , noma ranet tiarga am lia lera ida .
On the next day , we who were Paul 's companions departed and came to Caesarea . We entered into the house of Philip the evangelist , who was one of the seven , and stayed with him . ||| Repar wa , dewade amha'at la kapli pa amhopal pa amla'awa Kaisarea . Amte'ela hande pa mla ' a riy ida mak nhi'inde nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni kalwiedni-paitiotni la riy mak edon ratlin ma'ta Yesus lirni-tunnu . Ha nwawa Pilipsu , noka amden la romni nayanni . E ' wal pia ed maka ha rwalir wialia la ' a riy mandiditu la ' a Yerusalem , totpa nkar lia Itmatromlawanni kniarni ralamni .
Now this man had four virgin daughters who prophesied . ||| A'nani hararara riy wogata . Itmatromlawanni Nal oleka ruri-lai penpuenu pa nhi'inde rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Enalharia la ' ira .
As we stayed there some days , a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea . ||| A ler mamni na'ida-nawor lia hande , noma makwohorulu-ktatrulu ida nanni Agabus nwatiawua Yudea pa nmai wia .
Coming to us and taking Paul 's belt , he bound his own feet and hands , and said , The Holy Spirit says , ‘ So the Jews at Jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt , and will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles . ' ||| Nmai tieman la ami noma na'ala Paulus rewni pa Agabus na nwutga e inon wamueheni limni-lakni na'nama nror targa pa niwra , Hadi ed maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot targa , de rew di matromni hota rwutu-rkohoga la ' a Yerusalem pa emek a ' g e ghi ' a di . Mak kwutu-kohu re , riy Yahudi me hota rala rew di matromni la riy mak Yahudi atia ' a .
When we heard these things , both we and the people of that place begged him not to go up to Jerusalem . ||| La'pa amatlin nan hade , noma amora a mutwual miamni re honona mak kden la Kaisarea mpak lilili-mamuau lia Paulus pa yan memmemna nhapar la Yerusalem .
Then Paul answered , What are you doing , weeping and breaking my heart ? For I am ready not only to be bound , but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus . ||| Mere nakot mai ami , Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' a hya ' pede mkio ' a-mkiakru emkadena pa la'pa mhi ' a a ralmu nmayo ' a ? ! Awuayow olek pa hota alier la wutwutu-kokgohu , me la'pa rwen a lia Yerusalem la ' a Itmatromni Yesus kniarni wawannu , de a ' g edonna wuadur nana pera ida .
When he would not be persuaded , we ceased , saying , The Lord 's will be done . ||| Lirni emkade , pede ami edonna mpak owa'an pa yana nla'awa Yerusalem . Mere makot miwra , Hya ' maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nwarora-nwalaiya hota Nwayow pa rhi ' nana-ryap niana .
After these days we took up our baggage and went up to Jerusalem . ||| Amden nek la hande , pa lera wo'ir memna , noma ampahi ' a-mpayod pia amla'awa la Yerusalem .
Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us , bringing one Mnason of Cyprus , an early disciple , with whom we would stay . ||| Nhi'noka riy makpesiay wo'ir meman la Kaisarea , pa ror pa rottiar am lia ' Manason romni . Yoma amparor olek pa hota amtaw tiar lia e ' de . Manason de , de riy Siprus ida de , mahneka memna ha nlernohora Yesus wniatutnu-wniaye'eni .
When we had come to Jerusalem , the brothers received us gladly . ||| La'pa amte'ela Yerusalem noma a mut muamni mak kden hande rahepur nohor ami .
The day following , Paul went in with us to James , and all the elders were present . ||| Repar noma Paulus nor am pia mla mtomar la Yakowsi . O'ta-mata la makpesiay Yesus mutnu re honona , erla hande wali .
When he had greeted them , he reported one by one the things which God had worked among the Gentiles through his ministry . ||| La'pa Paulus nwak kalwied la ir pa nhorwua , noma Paulus nakot nohora hya'-hya ' maka Uplerlawna Ntutga la e ' pa nhi ' a la riy maka Yahudi atia ' a .
They , when they heard it , glorified God . They said to him , You see , brother , how many thousands there are among the Jews of those who have believed , and they are all zealous for the law . ||| La'pa ratlin oleka Paulus wniahaurnu de noma honona re ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna . Nhorwua noma rakot la Paulus , Heiwialia ! Heiwia'lu erammu la ' a temmu , yoma Yahudi riwnu-halli olek pa rpesiay Yesus . Mere ir honona de riy mak khu'ru-khelma matmiati lia Musa deullu-tatarni .
They have been informed about you , that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses , telling them not to circumcise their children and not to walk after the customs . ||| Ne dodo'ondi de , ratlina lir kdiori , de hyalia mpuatutga Yahudi honona mak kahulti-kahamra la ' a hairi-hairi dom to ' a , totpena yana rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni . Ne ratlin nana heiwia'lu muala ralma-rior la ira , totpena yana rsunta upni-a'nani me yana rlernohora Yahudi pa'etnu-parahmani .
What then ? The assembly must certainly meet , for they will hear that you have come . ||| Plola pa riy Yahudi mak kpesiay oleka re hota ratlin nan la ' a heiwia'lu ed olek la handi , pa hota itsi ' emkameni mai ita ?
Therefore do what we tell you . We have four men who have taken a vow . ||| Mai pia itsi ' emkadi , totpa tler la kalwiedni . La ' a mut muamni de riy wogata e rlokra-rhautu olek la Orgahi-Orha ' a .
Take them and purify yourself with them , and pay their expenses for them , that they may shave their heads . Then all will know that there is no truth in the things that they have been informed about you , but that you yourself also walk keeping the law . ||| Pede dodo'ondi , omuora riy mandadata ri mlia ' pa ra ramou-rawitna miy riewre'wa . Muala kupan pa raweli himimni-rere'eni pa rodia la imam totpena ri'ir moratnu re emeka nhi'inde rhi ' a , la'pa liokra ida nhorwua . La ' emkade , totpena riy honona rat muemna la ' a hya ' mak iratlina re , de honona rhala . Yoma heiwia'lu nek de nlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni .
But concerning the Gentiles who believe , we have written our decision that they should observe no such thing , except that they should keep themselves from food offered to idols , from blood , from strangled things , and from sexual immorality . ||| Mere la ' a riy Yahudi atia ' a makpesiay oleka Yesus de ami edon mpak pa rlernohora hade , yoma ita'enyat oleka horta la ira la ' a hya ' maka ha reti oleka wa totpena yan memmemna ra'ana-remnia ya'ana-yemnu maka ha ra rhoi-rtani lia uplera-upmati . Yan memmemna remun rara , me yan ra'an ha ihi maka riy edon rotna tiernu-rkokia apannu , me yan ralira-raliai .
Then Paul took the men , and the next day purified himself and went with them into the temple , declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification , until the offering was offered for every one of them . ||| La ' a repar lerni noma Paulus nora riy mandadata re rla ' pa ror rewre'wa Paulus pa ramou-rawitna inonni re . Noma Paulus nla'awa Uplerlawna roma kreini pa nakot nohor la imam , totpena lera wo'it owa'an nanpena yamou-yawitan de nhoru , me rima-rima hota rodia nhioi-tniani pa rala la Uplerlawna .
When the seven days were almost completed , the Jews from Asia , when they saw him in the temple , stirred up all the multitude and laid hands on him , ||| La'pa la'awa lera wo'it pua nhi'pa nhorwua , de Yahudi mak kwatiawu Asia riy wo'ira ramkek nana Paulus la ' a Uplerlawna roma kreini . Noma ra'hira riy rahu pede rtorna Paulus .
crying out , Men of Israel , help ! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people , and the law , and this place . Moreover , he also brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place ! ||| Noma rhaunu-rhaunu pa riwra , Israel miy re , mtiulan nan mai ami ee ! Ha rlerna inhattioo ! E ' ed mak kwatutu-kwaye'ela meni-meni to ' a , pa riy honona edonna ratlin la hairi Israel , me yana rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni me napolu-naliella Uplerlawna roma kreini . Ne yeher to ' a nodi owa'ana riy mak Yahudi atia ' pa rma rhi ' akdeha-aktiahlia Uplerlawna romni mak kmou-kwitan di .
For they had seen Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the city , and they supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple . ||| Rakot emkade yoma iramkek nana dodo'ona Trofimus makden Epsus de nor rewre'wa Paulus la letlawna ralamni , ne ratniekamde Paulus nodia riy de pa nla'awa la Uplerlawna romni kreini .
All the city was moved and the people ran together . They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple . Immediately the doors were shut . ||| Letlawna mniotni honona kokokna-rariarin nohora re , rawlar tipru-warta pa rawoka . Noma rtorna Paulus ne ri'ita la tio'ora . Ler de meman pa rho'la Uplerlawna romni nhiarni .
As they were trying to kill him , news came up to the commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was in an uproar . ||| La'pa riwra rwenna Paulus , dewade riy rla rakota mak kodia keki-rautu Roma o'tani riwra , Ee ! Makden la Yerusalem uhunu-riwni rler la yawenan lawna !
Immediately he took soldiers and centurions and ran down to them . They , when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers , stopped beating Paul . ||| Mtatande nekpa o'ta lawna nora makodi keki-rautu ror o'tani rhapartikil nohora la ' a yawenan lawna genni . La'pa ramkek nana o'ta lawna de nora makodi keki-rautu rpitu-rkor pa rtopur pa rmai wia , dewade wnianalu la Paulus rho ' taru .
Then the commanding officer came near , arrested him , commanded him to be bound with two chains , and inquired who he was and what he had done . ||| Makodi keki-rautu o'ta lawna nhopan pa rtoran reria Paulus pa rrantia Paulus limni malwiru-malganna la mak katiaka riy woru . Noma o'tani de natiana , Riy di de he ' a ? Hya ' a pede emkadina ?
Some shouted one thing and some another , among the crowd . When he could n't find out the truth because of the noise , he commanded him to be brought into the barracks . ||| Mere riy mak kden hande rhaunu pa doma rakot emkadina , dom de rakot emkade . Kokokna-rariarin rehia pede o'tani de edonna nlernana he ' ed mak khala . Emkade pede o'tani nhopan pa rodia Paulus la mak kodi keki-rautu yatiak genni .
When he came to the stairs , he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd , ||| Rodia pa rte'ela retna , noma riy rahu rod lia'-rod miaiya pa riwra rliwra-rkaklia , pede mak kodia keki-rautu re rakwara Paulus pa rhapet reria .
for the multitude of the people followed after , crying out , Away with him ! ||| Riy rahu mak kokna-krarni re rlernohor reria Paulus pa rhaunu-rhaunu riwra , Mpienan memna hade !
As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks , he asked the commanding officer , May I speak to you ? He said , Do you know Greek ? ||| La'pa riwa rte'ela makodi keki-rautu yatiak genni , noma Paulus nakot la makodia keki-rautu o'tani , Matroma , mpuayow pa ukot li'ru . Noma makodi keki-rautu o'tani nheduma pa natiana , Eh ! O muat niohora yawal Yunani ?
Are n't you then the Egyptian who before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins ? ||| Hade emkade de o ' di de mak kmalawna hairi Roma o ' a ? Riy makden Mesir maka ktut iwarni-wo'orni , me nodia wlaria riy riwnu wogata mak kmalawna pa rler la wo'ora-kawru la ' ler ululu ?
But Paul said , I am a Jew from Tarsus in Cilicia , a citizen of no insignificant city . I beg you , allow me to speak to the people . ||| Mere Paulus nwahla niwra , Edonna matroma . Riy Yahudi id a ' u , makden leta Tarsus la ' Kilikia . Let maka nakota-nanana . Mtiulan pa mrieinian a ' pua ultier lia riy maka kokokna-rariarni re .
When he had given him permission , Paul , standing on the stairs , beckoned with his hand to the people . When there was a great silence , he spoke to them in the Hebrew language , saying , ||| La'pa o'tani de nwayow nohora Paulus , dewade Paulus ntutrier lia retna na'nama nayer limni rla totpena riy harahu re ramolmuolga . Dewade honona ema rwun wuenna . Noma Paulus nnairia yawala Ibrani pa na naltieri pia nakot la re ,
Brothers and fathers , listen to the defense which I now make to you . ||| Ina-ama , ina-nara miy hononmi maka aguh idma-riama lia'armi . Awuak pa agheri-ghelta a ino'nu la ' miy . Awuak pa mtia'wa reri tlinmi mai a ' u .
When they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew language , they were even more quiet . He said , ||| Yoma ratlina Paulus naltier die nnairi yawala Ibrani , pede yeher to ' pa mtulu-mtie'ela re . Paulus nakot la
I am indeed a Jew , born in Tarsus of Cilicia , but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel , instructed according to the strict tradition of the law of our fathers , being zealous for God , even as you all are today . ||| A ' di de riy Yahudi id a ' u . A i'nu ntor a lia Tarsus noha-rai Kilikia . Mere ramori-ralawna a lia mai Yerusalem la handi , me tungkuru Gamaliel mak kwatutga plu'unu-plehenu a lia ' deulu-tatra maka Musa nala la it upni-tgarni . Emolmolan walia miy hononmi la ' a ler di wali , aghu'ru-ghelam matmiati Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni honona .
I persecuted this Way to the death , binding and delivering into prisons both men and women , ||| Aniahora-niala ' a la'pa awunu-wuenna riy mak klelernohora Yesus yala'ani de . La'pa patke ' a rora muanke ' a , honona rde atiorna pa awui'ita la roma nhio'la .
as also the high priest and all the council of the elders testify , from whom also I received letters to the brothers , and traveled to Damascus to bring them also who were there to Jerusalem in bonds to be punished . ||| Imam o'ta lawna , me ina-ama honona mak ktorna agama watghudni pena rtutrier wial saksi pia rat niohora a hihi ' u-yapya'pu . Yoma ir er mak kala horta-hairi pa agodia la Yahudi mak kden la Damsik . Atiorreria horat re totpena awuatorna riy makpesiay Yesus ne agodi muai Yerusalem di pa rukmua .
As I made my journey and came close to Damascus , about noon suddenly a great light shone around me from the sky . ||| La ' lerni mak a lia Damsik de , pa tre ' ma't oke ' pa alier la Damsik , la ' lera nwawuau ro'onni , dewade plinu-plinnianamde tlen lawna ida layarni la lyanti pa nle'lu reri a ' u .
I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me , ‘ Saul , Saul , why are you persecuting me ? ' ||| Dewade a'upru'wu tar lia tani wawannu pa utlina lira id nakot mai a ' u , Saulus , Saulus ee ! Hya ' nrei pia omumuki-muma'al A ' u ? !
I answered , ‘ Who are you , Lord ? ' He said to me , ‘ I am Jesus of Nazareth , whom you persecute . ' ||| Noma a'utiana , He ' o ' a Matroma ? Yesus . A ' g inhatti . Riy Nasaret mak omumuki-muma'al de .
Those who were with me indeed saw the light and were afraid , but they did n't understand the voice of him who spoke to me . ||| Agor rewre'wa riy mak kden hande mamkeka tlen lawan de . Mere ir edonna rna'erit nana lir mak kaltier mai a ' u .
I said , ‘ What shall I do , Lord ? ' The Lord said to me , ‘ Arise , and go into Damascus . There you will be told about all things which are appointed for you to do . ' ||| Noma utian owa'ana , Hota hya ' maka aghi ' a Matromlawnu ne ? Noma Itmatromlawanni Nakot mai a ' u , Mumat doin la pa mlier la Damsik . La ' a hande nanpena Uplerlawna na Nakot o kniarmu .
When I could n't see for the glory of that light , being led by the hand of those who were with me , I came into Damascus . ||| A ma'tu npona , yoma tlena lipni-layarni nweyat targa . Noma a mutwua'lu re rnahemna a ' u pua amler la leta Damsik ralamni .
One Ananias , a devout man according to the law , well reported of by all the Jews who lived in Damascus , ||| Riy id la hande de nwawa Ananias . E ' de riy plele'era ne natlina-natail la ' a deulu-tatra Musa . La ' walia riy Yahudi honona la ' a Damsik de ratu ra'unni-ramta'ata de . Enmai pia namkek a ' u ,
came to me , and standing by me said to me , ‘ Brother Saul , receive your sight ! ' In that very hour I looked up at him . ||| noma ntutrier lia a wa'lu pa nakot mai a ' u , Saulus , hyalia , mpuer matmu . La ' a mtatande nekpa umkek nan e ' a .
He said , ‘ The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will , and to see the Righteous One , and to hear a voice from his mouth . ||| Noma nakot mai a ' u de niwra , Hyalia , Uplerlawna la it upni-tgarni ed mak kwalir o ' totpena omuat niohora E yala'ani . Ne totpa mumkek la Riy Ploloi-Plele'era mak Uplerlawna Nano'targa pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori me totpa mutlin nana E lirni .
For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and heard . ||| Hota o ' ed mak ktutrier saksi pa mukot nohora la riy honona la ' a hya ' maka mumkeka ne hya ' maka mutlina .
Now why do you wait ? Arise , be baptized , and wash away your sins , calling on the name of the Lord . ' ||| Dodo'ondi yana ralammu worworga . Mupriri , ne mlia ' pa rhara'nu . Mpuol lia Itmatromni , totpena Namou-nawitna do'omu-halmu .
When I had returned to Jerusalem and while I prayed in the temple , I fell into a trance ||| A'uwal lia Yerusalem , ne la'pa asiumbain rer lia ' Uplerlawna roma kreini , de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Napenga a ralmu pa
and saw him saying to me , ‘ Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly , because they will not receive testimony concerning me from you . ' ||| a'umkek nana Itmatromni noma Nakot mai a ' u , Mupleta ! Mliergot la Yerusalem diwa . Yoma hota riy mak kden la handi edonna ratlin la hya ' maka omukot nohora la ' a A wawnu .
I said , ‘ Lord , they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those who believed in you . ||| Noma awuahla , Edonna emkade Matroma , hota ratlin mai a ' u , yoma irat muemna la a ' die ed mak kwahu'ru Yahudi kreini-iskolli genni re pa atioran makpesiaya O ' a re pa aliwra-kaklia re .
When the blood of Stephen , your witness , was shed , I also was standing by , consenting to his death , and guarding the cloaks of those who killed him . ' ||| Nhi ' wal pia Stefanus mak kakot nohora O lirmu de rwenan nana , de atiutrier wiali me awuayow wal pia rwen e ' a . A ' g ed mak katiaka mak kwenna re rayanni .
He said to me , ‘ Depart , for I will send you out far from here to the Gentiles . ' ||| Mere Itmatromni Nakot owa'an la mai a ' u , Mlia'awa , yoma hota A ' g ed mak khopan pa omlia ' a gen miaka oliet memna , la ' a riy maka Yahudi atia ' a .
They listened to him until he said that , then they lifted up their voice and said , Rid the earth of this fellow , for he is n't fit to live ! ||| Riy harahu mak katlina re edonna rwadur ma'ta la genni . Mere la'awa honi pa Paulus nakot nohora niwra Uplerlawna Nhopan pa Paulus nla nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la Yahudi atia ' a , dewade rawenan doin la , nhi'nande rhaun pa riwra , Mpienna , mpienna riy mak emkade . Yana twayow pa nmormiori .
As they cried out , threw off their cloaks , and threw dust into the air , ||| Rawenan pa rhaun reri tio'owa , ne ro'lu rain lawan wamueheni re pa rkakna , me rnaklia koda-awu la ' heyanna .
the commanding officer commanded him to be brought into the barracks , ordering him to be examined by scourging , that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that . ||| Dewade Komandan la makodia keki-rautu la Roma nhopan pa rodia Paulus la makodi keki-rautu yatiak genni totpena rnairi ha ulti pa rliwra-rkaklia ne ratian nohora plolli-halli . Hya ' mak krei pede Yahudi re polpuolu-hawaunia re ?
When they had tied him up with straps , Paul asked the centurion who stood by , Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman , and not found guilty ? ||| Mere la'pa rwutga Paulus pa riwa rliwra , noma Paulus nakot la o'ta-mata la makodi keki-rautu rahu ida mak ktutrier lia hande , Hairi Roma deullu-tatarni nwayow nohora pa makden hairi Roma , la'pa edonna rat mua'ta plolli-halli de rliwra-rkaklia ? !
When the centurion heard it , he went to the commanding officer and told him , Watch what you are about to do , for this man is a Roman ! ||| Makodi keki-rautu rahu ida o'tani natlin nana dewade nla nakota la e ' o'tani niwra , Matroma , hota itsi ' hya ' a ? Riy di mak kden la hair lawna Roma id e ' a .
The commanding officer came and asked him , Tell me , are you a Roman ? He said , Yes . ||| Noma o'tani de nla ' a Paulus de pa natiana niwra , Mukot nohora teka , o ' di de makden Roma id o ' a ? Noma Paulus nwayowa niwra , A ' di de makdena hair lawna Roma molanni id a ' u .
The commanding officer answered , I bought my citizenship for a great price . Paul said , But I was born a Roman . ||| O'tani de nakot owa'ana , La'pa agiwra u'itra-ulawan la Roma mutnu de , apuair werwerta . Noma Paulus nakot la , Mere a ' di de rtetia a horu-rki'ira a kliawtu la ' Roma .
Immediately those who were about to examine him departed from him , and the commanding officer also was afraid when he realized that he was a Roman , because he had bound him . ||| La'pa ratlin tutga Paulus lirni dewade makodia keki-rautu mak kiwra katiana Paulus plolli-halli re honona rwadura , ne o'tani mana namta'at wenan wali yoma e ' ed mak kenia ranti la Paulus limni . Natniekamde Paulus de Roma atia ' de .
But on the next day , desiring to know the truth about why he was accused by the Jews , he freed him from the bonds and commanded the chief priests and all the council to come together , and brought Paul down and set him before them . ||| O'tani la makodi keki-rautu re nahak pa nat muemna hya ' a rerieini pa Yahudi rwaghala Paulus . La hade pede repar noma nhopan pa rpolga imam-imam o'tani-matni honona , ror rewre'wa o'ta-mata mak ktorna agama watghudni re korni honona pa rma rawoka . Me nwe'er doin Paulus pa nodia la ir honona gaini .
Paul , looking steadfastly at the council , said , Brothers , I have lived before God in all good conscience until today . ||| Noma Paulus namkek tutga ina-ama mak ha rpol niana re pa nakot la re , Ama-hyal miy re , nodia pa ler di , awuarora de ukleh hal la Uplerlawna la ' a a mormio'ru-dardia'ru ralamni .
The high priest , Ananias , commanded those who stood by him to strike him on the mouth . ||| Rnahmi rer lia lir de pede imam lawna , Ananias nhopna mak kaprir lia hande rkiria lo'mani rpahara la Paulus nurnu .
Then Paul said to him , God will strike you , you whitewashed wall ! Do you sit to judge me according to the law , and command me to be struck contrary to the law ? ||| Noma Paulus nakot la imam lawna niwra , Hota Uplerlawna Nwalo'ma o hgotmu , de nurmu yoma mputra-mpualka pa mtiot pa mhi ' inonmu de riy plele'era . Mumtatan la hande pa muetlia a ha'lu , mliernohora Musa . Mere inon wamuehemu nek de muwlar dioinia Musa deullu-tatarni , pa mhuopna riy rwalo'ma a ga'yu .
Those who stood by said , Do you malign God 's high priest ? ||| Riy mak ktutrier lia hande riwra , Yana muhe ' i-mumalia imam lawna la Uplerlawna .
Paul said , I did n't know , brothers , that he was high priest . For it is written , ‘ You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people . ' ||| Paulus nakot la re , Oh a'uplingoo ! Ama-hyal miy re , a'uplinga de , riy de makla ' imam lawna . Puklawna e nakota de , Yana mihe ' i-mimalia o'ta-mata hairi nayanni .
But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees , he cried out in the council , Men and brothers , I am a Pharisee , a son of Pharisees . Concerning the hope and resurrection of the dead I am being judged ! ||| Paulus nat niohora de la ' mak kawok taru re , de riy Saduki , me riy Parisi erla pede Paulus nakot la mak kawok taru re , Ama-hyal miy re , a ' di de riy Parisi id a ' u , me plola pa Parisi duratni-waitni a ' di . Mimihak a plo'lu-a ha'lu la handi , yoma apuesiay hota mak kmati , hota rmori owa'ana .
When he had said this , an argument arose between the Pharisees and Sadducees , and the crowd was divided . ||| La'pa nakot emkade dewade Saduki rora Parisi idma nod lia ' a-nod miai ida , pa nhi'nande woka-le ' die nwal lia woka-le ' u wor wua .
For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection , nor angel , nor spirit , but the Pharisees confess all of these . ||| Yoma riy Saduki ralma-riorni de mak kmati re taken niana rmori owa'ana , me Uplerlawna hopopanni-li'irnu rora hmuakarnu mati lianu hadamonna . Mere riy Parisi rpesiay hare honona de erla .
A great clamor arose , and some of the scribes of the Pharisees ' part stood up , and contended , saying , We find no evil in this man . But if a spirit or angel has spoken to him , let 's not fight against God ! ||| La'pa kniokna-riarni na'ititar rer lia , Parisi riy wo'ira mak kla ' a makwatutu-kwaye ' a agama raprir pia rawahla lira re . Riwra , La ' a wniaror mamni de riy di edonna nhala kuku ' eti . Yanhi'pa hmuakarnu onde Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu ror toto ' e ' pa raltieri .
When a great argument arose , the commanding officer , fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them , commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force from among them and bring him into the barracks . ||| Yawenan lawan de pede makodi keki-rautu o'tani de namta'at pa yan kekwal die riy ru'uta-rtorna Paulus la letgara pa nhi'nande nmati . Pede e nhopan pa makodi keki-rautu re ra'ala Paulus la mutu letgarni pa rodia la ir yatiak genni markasni .
The following night , the Lord stood by him and said , Cheer up , Paul , for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem , so you must testify also at Rome . ||| La'pa lera nmel wa dewade Itmatromni Yesus Naprir lia Paulus onni me Nhar lirni niwra , Mutehra ralammu . Emolmolla omukot nohora A ' g olek la Yerusalem hota omlia mukot nohora wal lia letlawna Roma .
When it was day , some of the Jews banded together and bound themselves under a curse , saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul . ||| Repar doini de riy Yahudi rawok pa rpanulga nnia'ohma-nniakatni . Ir rlokar rwah ' a inonni , riwra hota ir edonna ra'ana-remnu la'pa lerni pa edonna rwenan ma'ta Paulus .
There were more than forty people who had made this conspiracy . ||| Ir wokni-le'enu de de riy o'ta terampwogat rehenu .
They came to the chief priests and the elders , and said , We have bound ourselves under a great curse to taste nothing until we have killed Paul . ||| Rla ' a imam-imam o'tani-matni , me Yahudi in letni-am letni pa rakot la , Am miy re , a hononam di , amlokra-mhautu oleka inon mamni hota ami edonna ma'ana-memun ma'ta , la'pa nte'ela lerni pa ampenan Paulus de .
Now therefore , you with the council inform the commanding officer that he should bring him down to you tomorrow , as though you were going to judge his case more exactly . We are ready to kill him before he comes near . ||| Ne dodo'ondi de miora mak ktorna agama watghudni re korni mlia ' totpena mpiak la makodi keki-rautu o'tani mak kwatiawua Roma , mpiak la e ' a , pa nodia Paulus pa nma ntut gaini owa'an la miy , emolmolla miy miwra mitian owa'ana plolli . Ne la'pa la talan letgara nanpena ampenna .
But Paul 's sister 's son heard they were lying in wait , and he came and entered into the barracks and told Paul . ||| Mere ira nnia'ohmani de Paulus narni a'nani muanke ' a natlin nohora noma nla nakota Paulus la makodi keki-rautu yatiak genni .
Paul summoned one of the centurions and said , Bring this young man to the commanding officer , for he has something to tell him . ||| Noma Paulus npolga makla ' o'ta la makodi keki-rautu rahu ida , na'nama nakot la , Tuna , mtiulan pa muodia tuwari di mlia ' a miy o'tami de . Yoma e niwa nakot hadom la miy o'tami de .
So he took him and brought him to the commanding officer and said , Paul , the prisoner , summoned me and asked me to bring this young man to you . He has something to tell you . ||| Noma nodia tuwari die la ' a o'ta lawna pa nakot la , Ama , Paulus mak ha rho'la tar die npol pua agodia tuwari di pa amuai a'mu la ' handi . E niwa nakot hadom la a'mu .
The commanding officer took him by the hand , and going aside , asked him privately , What is it that you have to tell me ? ||| Noma o'ta lawan de ntorreria tuwari die limni pa nodia la wali pa natiana , Omuiwra mukota hya ' mai a ' u ?
He said , The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow , as though intending to inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him . ||| Noma tuwari die nwalolla , Tuna , riy Yahudi re rna'ohma olekwa pa hota rwak la tuna totpa repar lerni de muodia Paulus la ina-ama mak ktorna agama watghudi re , totpena emolmolla iriwra ratiana plu'unu-plehenu owa'ana .
Therefore do n't yield to them , for more than forty men lie in wait for him , who have bound themselves under a curse to neither eat nor drink until they have killed him . Now they are ready , looking for the promise from you . ||| Yana mliernohora ir wakwakni de , yoma riy terampwogata rehenu e rwuw rer lia talan letgara pa hota rwenna la hande . Honona re rwalokr olekwa , pa hota edonna ra'ana-remnia hadoma la ' ler maka edonna rwenan ma'ta Paulus . Ir honona e rwei tio ' pa tuna nwayow nana ir wakwakni .
So the commanding officer let the young man go , charging him , Tell no one that you have revealed these things to me . ||| Noma o'ta lawan de nakot la , Ama , yan memmemna omukot hadella ' riy ida , maka mukot oleka mai a ' u la ler di . Noma nhopan pa tuwari die nla'awa .
He called to himself two of the centurions , and said , Prepare two hundred soldiers to go as far as Caesarea , with seventy horsemen and two hundred men armed with spears , at the third hour of the night . ||| Nhorwua noma o'ta lawanni de npolga makodi keki-rautu o'tani woru pua nakot la , Mpiahor doinia makodi keki-rautu riy rahu woru , rora mak kodia kuda ya'ara terampwo'itu , me makodia tera-ra'pa riy rahu woru pa rarian pa rla'awa Kaisarea la jam wosiewa mela .
He asked them to provide mounts , that they might set Paul on one , and bring him safely to Felix the governor . ||| Mial walia kuda pa Paulus nha'at la me mitiak kalwieda pa miodia la Gubernur Feliks .
He wrote a letter like this , ||| Me Komandan nal walia horta id pa rodia . La horat de Komandana nakot emkadilla ,
Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix , Greetings . ||| Gubernur Feliks maka aghu'ru-aghelma ahormata-kanala . Klaudius Lisias , awuak kalwieda tiy o ' a .
This man was seized by the Jews , and was about to be killed by them when I came with the soldiers and rescued him , having learned that he was a Roman . ||| Riy di , riy Yahudi rtorn oleka wa me tre ' kuku ' nekpa rwenna , mere a'uplet nohora a lidnu ne ulewna , yoma utlina de Paulus di riy Roma ida de .
Desiring to know the cause why they accused him , I brought him down to their council . ||| La'pa agiwa gat wual lia ' halli hya ' , pede agodi e ' la Yahudi o'tani-matni mak ktorna agama watghudni .
I found him to be accused about questions of their law , but not to be charged with anything worthy of death or of imprisonment . ||| Mere utlina de nakleha do ' a-hala mak krei totpena rodia niukum matmiati onde rodia la roma nhio'la . Lir mak ha rodi re , de edonna tlernana la lodna-hairi niukamnu maka rdeul taru-rtatar taru . Mere rawo'or nohor neka Musa deullu-tatarni mak ir memeh ' a nanpa rlernohora .
When I was told that the Jews lay in wait for the man , I sent him to you immediately , charging his accusers also to bring their accusations against him before you . Farewell . ||| La ' walia riy rma rakot mai a ' u , de Yahudi re rna'ohma yatyatni la riy di . Hade pede aghopan pa rodia rmai wia tuna Gubernura . Ne aghopan wal pia mak kaklaka e ' a re , ror wal pia , rmai totpena rakot nohora la ' a hya ' a rerieini pa e raklaka hadi totpena tuna nmeh ' a natlin walia .
So the soldiers , carrying out their orders , took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris . ||| Noka makodi keki-rautu re radil doin wa . Ra'ala Paulus la mel de meman pa rodi rla'awa leta Antipatris .
But on the next day they left the horsemen to go with him , and returned to the barracks . ||| Repar noma kud ya'ara lidanni nodia Paulus pa rodi liarni . Ne korni re rawal lia makodi keki-rautu yatiak genni .
When they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor , they also presented Paul to him . ||| La'pa kud ya'ara re lidanni nte'ela Kaisarea noma rodia horta pa rala la Gubernur , ne ral walia Paulus la .
When the governor had read it , he asked what province he was from . When he understood that he was from Cilicia , he said , ||| La'pa Gubernur de npaikia horat pa nhorwua , noma natiana Paulus , Ee , ompuatiawu hya ' noha propinsi ? Tuna , awuatiawua Kilikia . La'pa natga Paulus de nwatiawua Kilikia ,
I will hear you fully when your accusers also arrive . He commanded that he be kept in Herod 's palace . ||| noma nakot la , Emkadewa , hota a ' g ed mak ketlia o lirmu-tunmu mere , twewiei niohora mak kaklak o ' a re . Noma nhopan pa ratiak reria Paulus la ray Herodes romni .
After five days , the high priest , Ananias , came down with certain elders and an orator , one Tertullus . They informed the governor against Paul . ||| La'pa lera wolima rlardoin la , dewade imam o'ta lawna Ananias nor nhielli-liarni o'ta-mata Yahudi re rwatiawua Yerusalem pa rla'awa la Kaisarea , rora mak kod lira ida nwawa Tertulus . Ir honona rla raklaka Paulus la Gubernur Feliks .
When he was called , Tertullus began to accuse him , saying , Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace , and that prosperity is coming to this nation by your foresight , ||| La'pa rpolga Paulus pa nmai wia na'nama Tertulus nteran Paulus la gubernura gaini . Tertulus niwra , Gubernur Feliks maka aghu'ru-aghelma ahormata-kanala , la mahnek memna o kniukammu-tnio'mamu di nodia gen mamni la linni-lerni mounu-wahrani . Me la ' a o ralma-riormu pa amler olek la kalwiedni .
we accept it in all ways and in all places , most excellent Felix , with all thankfulness . ||| Hare honona de amreiniana-ma'nana la o kalwiedmu mak amtutul rewre'wa , me ama'uli o ' a la ' hya ' a-hya ' a to ' a .
But that I do n't delay you , I entreat you to bear with us and hear a few words . ||| Awuak pa matro'mu natlin dodo'on to ' a lir mak amodi ri . Ne , totpa yana matro'mu kniarni namdierna .
For we have found this man to be a plague , an instigator of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world , and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes . ||| Riy di de amdu'du nana-mreran nana ha do'oni-halli de , riy di ed mak kodia riwtu-hora . La ' meni-meni to ' pa ha nhi ' a kokokna-rariarni la Yahudi makden hande , me nodgai lia woka ida mak klernohora riy id wniatutnu makden Nasaret . Ha wniatutnu-wniaye'eni de edon lola deulu-tatra Roma .
He even tried to profane the temple , and we arrested him . ||| Rereh wiali e ntot pa nhi ' akdeha Uplerlawna roma kreini pede amtorna . A wniaror mamni de pena ameh ' a mhudia la a agam mamni watghudni lokarni .
By examining him yourself you may ascertain all these things of which we accuse him . ||| Ne nhopan pa ma maklaka me mpatrom la matro'mu gaini . La'pa matro'mu nwahak hadi plolli-halli , de matro'mu nmeh ' a natlina e lirni , hota mak ha nakota re de emekwalia maka makota ri .
The Jews also joined in the attack , affirming that these things were so . ||| Yahudi mak kden la hande rlernohora hya ' maka Tertulus ha nakota re pa yeher to ' pa rakot walia Paulusa yatni-halli .
When the governor had beckoned to him to speak , Paul answered , Because I know that you have been a judge of this nation for many years , I cheerfully make my defense , ||| Noma Gubernur de nran limni la Paulus pa nhopan Paulus pa naltieri . Noma Paulus nakot la re , Agatga tuna ntorn oleka watghudi la ' a noh di , de mahnek memna . Hade pede a ' g edon umta'ata niahelta ino'nu la hal wawna la ' a tuna gaini ralamni .
seeing that you can verify that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem . ||| Pena tuna nmeh ' a natiana rira totpa tuna nat niohora hya ' maka a'ukota di naplola . De edonna narehelia lera termida wehrani woru mak klar olekwa de , alia kola tieru-gawur nehla la ' Yerusalem .
In the temple they did n't find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd , either in the synagogues or in the city . ||| Mak kwaghala a ' u re , edonna rlernana Yahudi id mana gora pa mawo'ora , onde ramkek aghi ' ma'ta woka-le ' u id pa ghi ' a kokokna-rariarni la Uplerlawna roma kreini , la ' walia Yahudi kreini-iskolli genni re , onde la leta ralamni .
Nor can they prove to you the things of which they now accuse me . ||| Hade pede ir mana edonna rte'la rer lia a li'mu la ' a hya ' maka irodia la tuna gaini .
But this I confess to you , that according to the Way , which they call a sect , so I serve the God of our fathers , believing all things which are according to the law , and which are written in the prophets , ||| Mere meman neka la , awuayow la ' tuna gaini de plola pa aliernohora Yesus wniatutnu pa akola tieru-gawur nehla la a u'pu-tga'ru Uplerlawanni . Yesus wniatutnu de , Yahudi ri riwra nhala . Mere emekwali hare , apuesiay mia'ta hya ' maka ha rhorat targa la Musa pukni me la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu pukni ralamni .
having hope toward God , which these also themselves look for , that there will be a resurrection of the dead , both of the just and unjust . ||| Emek ir wali , a ' muana gha'ara ino'nu la Uplerlawna , de hota riy honona rmor lia matmiati ralamni . Riy mak kaploloi-kaplele'era me riy mak khi ' do ' a-hala mana hota rmori owa'an la matmiati ralamni totpena hota Uplerlawna Nhudi riy honona la watghudi lokarni .
In this I also practice always having a conscience void of offense toward God and men . ||| La'pa hade pede aniaduran meman la ralma mou-witna la ' a Uplerlawna ne uploi-uple'er meman la rimormiori .
Now after some years , I came to bring gifts for the needy to my nation , and offerings , ||| La'awa anni wo'ira , de a ' g edonna dien la Yerusalem . A'uwal lia hande pa agodia kupan la riy Yahudi maka kakleha-kaplara . Nhi ' wal pia agodi nhioi-tniani la Uplerlawna .
amid which certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple , not with a mob , nor with turmoil . ||| La'pa a ' g e ghi ' rerer mia'ta hade , dewade irwatrom a lia Uplerlawna roma kreini pa aghi ' ahor muemna yamou-yawitna , de riy rahu edon ror a ' u , me kokokna-rariarnia edonan la hande .
They ought to have been here before you and to make accusation if they had anything against me . ||| Mere la Yerusalem , de Yahudi riy wo'ira erla , mak kwatiawua Asia yapatni . Toto ' a , de hare er mak krei pia riy rkokokna-rrariarni . La'pa ir riwra rwaghala a ' die , hota ir nekpa rod a lia tuna gaini .
Or else let these men themselves say what injustice they found in me when I stood before the council , ||| Onde mak kden la gen di , dodo'ondi rakot memna a ha'lu mak ina-ama Yahudi rlernana la ' a ler maka ir rodia a lia mak ktorna agama watghudni gaini .
unless it is for this one thing that I cried standing among them , ‘ Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am being judged before you today ! ' ||| La'pa a ' g edonna ghal de , e rte'la rer lia a li'ru la ' a mak aghaun pa ukota la hare gaini giwra , Miod a lia watghudi lokarni la ler di , yoma apuesiaya la rimormiori mak kmati olekwa mana hota ramori owa'ana .
But Felix , having more exact knowledge concerning the Way , deferred them , saying , When Lysias , the commanding officer , comes down , I will decide your case . ||| Feliks di nat niohor oleka liawanni la Yesus wniatutnu-wniaye'eni . Noka niwra , Hadewa pleini . Itwei pleinia Komandan Lisias nmai nianpena agetlia o plolmu-halmu .
He ordered the centurion that Paul should be kept in custody and should have some privileges , and not to forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him . ||| Nhor nioka nhopan doinia perwira mak katiaka Paulus de totpena yana nolin doinia Paulus mere yana nanetia nlarna Paulus pa nora mutwualli re idma namkek la ida totpa rtulan la e ' a .
After some days , Felix came with Drusilla his wife , who was a Jewess , and sent for Paul and heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus . ||| La'pa lera wo'ir dewade Feliks nmai wia nor rewre'wa hawni Drusila makdena Yahudi ida de . Noma Feliks nhopna rla rpolga Paulus totpa nmai , pa nakot nohora pesiay lia Ray mak Uplerlawna Nano'targa pa Namori-nalewna , de Yesus .
As he reasoned about righteousness , self-control , and the judgment to come , Felix was terrified , and answered , Go your way for this time , and when it is convenient for me , I will summon you . ||| La'pa natlin nana Paulus nwahaur nohora la ' a ploloi-plele'era nhioli-lieta , ne tatehra it ralamni la do'oni-halli , ne nakot walia hota Uplerlawna Nhudia it hononita la watu lokarni me Npara la tatiaili lahannu . Feliks natlin nana , dewade ihranu ndiwra pa niwra , Emkade de , hadewa plein la o wnialolmu pa yana plahwa , plet pa muprir pia mlia'awa . La'pa a'uhe ' i miamain nanpena apuolg o ' a .
Meanwhile , he also hoped that money would be given to him by Paul , that he might release him . Therefore also he sent for him more often and talked with him . ||| Feliks wniarorni de hota nlernan kupan la Paulus . La ' hade pede nhi'inde npolga Paulus pa rwahauru .
But when two years were fulfilled , Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus , and desiring to gain favor with the Jews , Felix left Paul in bonds . ||| La'pa anni woru rtaw doin la dewade Perkius Festus nherun-nwauga Feliks la Gubernur . Ne yoma Feliks niwa nwokmarga riy Yahudi re ralamni pede nahmena nalgota Paulus la roma nhio'la ralamni .
Festus therefore , having come into the province , after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea . ||| La'pa Festus na'nama lera wotellia ' propinsi de pa nodi plolli la , dewade nden la Kaisarea pa nokria Yerusalem .
Then the high priest and the principal men of the Jews informed him against Paul , and they begged him , ||| Noka imam-imam o'tani-matni rora Yahudi in letni-am letni raklaka Paulus la Festus .
asking a favor against him , that he would summon him to Jerusalem , plotting to kill him on the way . ||| Mere rnori-rtama Festus totpena Festus nhuria ralamni pa nhopna riy rodia Paulus la Yerusalem . Yoma rna'ohma olek pa totpena rwenna Paulus la talan letgara .
However Festus answered that Paul should be kept in custody at Caesarea , and that he himself was about to depart shortly . ||| Mere Festus nakot la re niwra , Paulus e nahnio'la ma'ta la Kaisarea pa hota edon nalo'on wali ne a'uwal lia Kaisarea .
Let them therefore , he said , that are in power among you go down with me , and if there is anything wrong in the man , let them accuse him . ||| Ne emkadella pa miala o'ta-mata wo'ir pa ror a tialla la ' Kaisarea totpa rto'on reria Paulus la a ga'yu pa tamkek teka he ' mak khala .
When he had stayed among them more than ten days , he went down to Caesarea , and on the next day he sat on the judgment seat , and commanded Paul to be brought . ||| La'pa Festus nden nek la Yerusalem pa hota lera wo'awa , onde termid owa'ana nanpa nawal lia Kaisarea . La'pa nawal lia Kaisarea pa repar dewade nhopan pa rpolga Paulus pa nma npesiar la Festus totpena rhudi-rpara .
When he had come , the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him , bringing against him many and grievous charges which they could not prove , ||| Paulus nmai wia dewade Yahudi mak kwatiawua Yerusalem re rpepan nana pa rakota lira-kdiori werwerta . Mere riy id mana edon nakot nohora Paulus halli onni , yoma hare honona de ha wniaror nan to ' a de .
while he said in his defense , Neither against the law of the Jews , nor against the temple , nor against Caesar , have I sinned at all . ||| Paulus naheri-nahelta inonni pa niwra , Tuna , la ' a Musa deullu-tatarni de a ' g edonna ghelkiai me la'pa Uplerlawna roma kreini nora ray Roma hairni mana a ' g edonna ghakpera .
But Festus , desiring to gain favor with the Jews , answered Paul and said , Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be judged by me there concerning these things ? ||| Mere Festus nwarora pa nwokmarga Yahudi re pa natiana Paulus niwra , Ompuayow de muor a ' tialan pa tla ' a Yerusalem totpa rhudi lia a ga'yu la ' lir mak ha ra rto'on reri o ' a re ?
But Paul said , I am standing before Caesar 's judgment seat , where I ought to be tried . I have done no wrong to the Jews , as you also know very well . ||| Paulus nwalolla , Tuna , dodo'ondi de a'getla watghudia ray Roma , pa agatga de watghudi lioklokarni e ' inhatti . Me tuna nat muemna oleka la agora Yahudi re de , unhala-gemnhala , ukleh do ' a-ukleh hal la re .
For if I have done wrong and have committed anything worthy of death , I do n't refuse to die , but if none of those things is true that they accuse me of , no one can give me up to them . I appeal to Caesar ! ||| La la'pa aghelkiai-ghakpera deulu-tatra , ne aghi ' a-yapia do ' a-hal mak edon nlewan la niukum mak kodia matmiati , de aghuria ino'nu pa rla rukum pen a ' u . Mere Yahudi ri rakleha nhiapargenni lia mai a ' u . Riy id mana mak klernohora Roma deullu-tatarni ta'en niana nodi plolli pa notlia a lia ira . Dodo'ondi de awuak pa mua mpuesiar la Kaisar ray liawna la Roma .
Then Festus , when he had conferred with the council , answered , You have appealed to Caesar . To Caesar you shall go . ||| La'pa makano ' a-ka'atu Festus re rora raltier pia nhorwua , noma Festus nakot la Paulus , Ompuak pa rodi o ' la watghudi Kaisar pa ampayowa .
Now when some days had passed , King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea and greeted Festus . ||| La'pa edon nalo'on wali ne ray Agripa me narni Bernike rma rpahar la Festus limni la Kaisarea .
As he stayed there many days , Festus laid Paul 's case before the king , saying , There is a certain man left a prisoner by Felix , ||| Rden nek la hande pa mahneka pede Festus nwahaur nohora Paulus lirni-tunnu la ray Agripa , niwra , Hyalia , mai handi Feliks e ntahan targa riy id la roma nhio'la .
about whom , when I was at Jerusalem , the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me , asking for a sentence against him . ||| Ler adien la Yerusalem de , imam-imam o'tani-matni rora Yahudi ina-ama leta rwak pa agetlia riy de lirni-tunnu pa giwra e ' de nhala .
I answered them that it is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man to destruction before the accused has met the accusers face to face and has had opportunity to make his defense concerning the matter laid against him . ||| Mere a'ukot la re , La ' a makden Roma taken niana ret wuamueh ' a la lira-tunu ida , mere ratlin walia mak khi ' lira-tun die pa nakot nohora ha lolola , ne maka rto'on reri de naheri-nahelta inonni .
When therefore they had come together here , I did n't delay , but on the next day sat on the judgment seat and commanded the man to be brought . ||| Pa la'pa rmai nioka , repar meman pa aghopan pa rpolga riy de pa rodia la ga'yu pa rhudia .
When the accusers stood up , they brought no charges against him of such things as I supposed , ||| La'pa mak kaklaka re rtutrieri pa rakot lirni , agatniekamde hota rakot nohora riy de halli maka itwarora de nhala .
but had certain questions against him about their own religion and about one Jesus , who was dead , whom Paul affirmed to be alive . ||| Mere ir yaklakni de rakot nohora to ' a iror riy de ralma-riorni edon ramnehela ir agamni . Irawo'or nohora riy ida mak kwawa Yesus . Riy di Nmati olekwa mere , Paulus nakota niwra plollolli de Nmori owa'ana .
Being perplexed how to inquire concerning these things , I asked whether he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there be judged concerning these matters . ||| La ' hade pede a wniaro'ru naktem la ir yaklakni la Paulus . Noma a'utiana Paulus la'pa nwayow de rla rpesiar la rodi la watghudi lokarni la Yerusalem .
But when Paul had appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor , I commanded him to be kept until I could send him to Caesar . ||| Mere Paulus nwak pa nden nek la roma nhio'la pa nwei mieman pa Kaisar netlia lirni . La ' hade pede aghopan pa yana nlergota plein la roma nhio'la ne nwei pia aliernana talan nanpena u'enyatga la Kaisar .
Agrippa said to Festus , I also would like to hear the man myself . Tomorrow , he said , you shall hear him . ||| Noma Agripa nakot la Festus , A ' muana giwra utlin teka lirni . Festus niwra , Dema repar nanpa tuna natlin lirni .
So on the next day , when Agrippa and Bernice had come with great pomp , and they had entered into the place of hearing with the commanding officers and the principal men of the city , at the command of Festus , Paul was brought in . ||| La'pa repar noma Agripa nor Bernike rmai die rtutga ir tullu-petanni . Rmai pia rodia liarni la mak ktorna watghudi tniau geni , me ror walia o'ta-mata lalawna la ' a makodi keki-rautu me ina-am lalawna la ' a letlawan de . Festus nhar lirni pa nhopan rodia Paulus pa rler la rialma .
Festus said , King Agrippa , and all men who are here present with us , you see this man about whom all the multitude of the Jews petitioned me , both at Jerusalem and here , crying that he ought not to live any longer . ||| Noma Festus nakot la , Maran lawna Agripa nora mak kpenpuenu-knanaha mak utota-uwawa , riy di de , riy Yahudi liewnu rto'on reri hadilla mai a ' u . Mak kden handi rora Yerusalem liewnu rteran nihini la hadi yaklakni . Rto'on reria me polpuolu-hawaunu nohora pa riwra , Mpuenan memna hade !
But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death , and as he himself appealed to the emperor , I determined to send him , ||| Mere a ' g edonna liernan ma'ta la ' a hya ' totpena aghapar rer lia pa rodia la wniair wenna . Ne , enmeh ' a nwak pa e lirni-tunnu di rodia la Kaisar pede aghopan pa ir rodia .
of whom I have no certain thing to write to my lord . Therefore I have brought him out before you , and especially before you , King Agrippa , that , after examination I may have something to write . ||| Mere a ' g edonna wuahi ' ma'ta a hortu-hai'ru pa a ' u'enyatga la Kaisar totpa ukot nohora e yala'ani . La ' hade pede atiut e ' la tuna-tuna miy hononmi la ' walia tun lawan mak ktoran reria lodna-hairi tuna Agripa . A ralma-rio'ru de totpa la'pa hadi nhor die de aliernan halli totpena akenia la horta .
For it seems to me unreasonable , in sending a prisoner , not to also specify the charges against him . ||| Yoma a wniaro'ru de ita'enyatga riy mak khala ida pa la'pa rukmua de , itakot momuowua halli honona la ' horta ralamni totpa rat mieman nohora .
Agrippa said to Paul , You may speak for yourself . Then Paul stretched out his hand , and made his defense . ||| Noka Agripa nakot la Paulus , A ' g ed mak khopan pa mhuar lirmu totpena mniahelta inonmu la hala . Noma Paulus nayer limni rla totpena nwak pa naltieri niwra ,
I think myself happy , King Agrippa , that I am to make my defense before you today concerning all the things that I am accused by the Jews , ||| Marna-wuhura Agripa maka aghu'ru-ghelma tiutulu-ukwara ahormata-kanala . Aliernana unut lawna yoma tuna meman pa mak khopna a'ultieri pia ukot nohora lira-tun muaka Yahudi ri ra rto'on reri mai a ' u .
especially because you are expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews . Therefore I beg you to hear me patiently . ||| Uhepur memna yoma tuna wal pia nat momuou Yahudi re deullu-tatarni la'pa hya ' ed maka nhi'inde ha rawo'or nohora . Pede awuak pa matro'mu ntulan pa natlin kalwiedweda lir mak a'ukota ri .
Indeed , all the Jews know my way of life from my youth up , which was from the beginning among my own nation and at Jerusalem , ||| Yahudi honona rat niohor oleka a mormio'ru la tuwari lewatni la ' adien ma'ta la let mak ha rmori a ' u . Rat niohora walia la ' a lerni la tuwari-lawer mua't a ' u , de amuori-diari , me pueha-liawan nohora a mormio'ru la Yerusalem .
having known me from the first , if they are willing to testify , that after the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee . ||| Yoma honona re rat niohora olek a lia mahneka memna ne la'pa riy id ir mana rwayow nohora , de ratga rakot nohora a nhio'lu-lie'tu la ulul geni , de aghi ' a ino'nu emek riy Parisi pa aghu'ru-ghelam matmiati ir deullu-tatarni honona , mak ha ror taru-rtatar targ olek la a agam mamni .
Now I stand here to be judged for the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers , ||| Ne dodo'ondi pa uprir lia handi , de totpena rhud a lia watghudi , yoma apuesiaya nnielu-niau muaka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la a up mamni-tgar mamni .
which our twelve tribes , earnestly serving night and day , hope to attain . Concerning this hope I am accused by the Jews , King Agrippa ! ||| Nnielu-niau die wal pia ed maka lodna-hairi termida wehrani woru la ' a Israel e rwuwu-rwei reria , de hota Uplerlawna Namori owa'an riy mak kmati . Me rkola-tieru lelera-melmel la Uplerlawna . A ' u muana wuwu-wiei nnielu-niau die , mere riy Yahudi ri rhapartiklia a pesia'yu di pa rwaghal a ' u , tuna .
Why is it judged incredible with you if God does raise the dead ? ||| Nihya'pa ina-nara Yahudi miy ta'en niana mpiesiaya de hota Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana riy mak kmati ? !
I myself most certainly thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth . ||| Ululu a ' mueman nek de wuarora-wualaiya de aghi ' a yatyatni hya ' to ' a pa atieri-tiawa etia Yesus mak kwatiawua Nasaret de wniahaurnu .
I also did this in Jerusalem . I both shut up many of the saints in prisons , having received authority from the chief priests , and when they were put to death I gave my vote against them . ||| Ne naplol la hade yoma aghi ' hadella Yerusalem . Ler de awuak horta mak ha rtapla hiwliai la ' a imam-imam o'tani-matni . Riy liawanni mak Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , a ' g ed mak ka'ita la roma nhio'la ralamni . Rerehniande a ' g ed mak kwayow nohor pa rhudia la niukum matmiati .
Punishing them often in all the synagogues , I tried to make them blaspheme . Being exceedingly enraged against them , I persecuted them even to foreign cities . ||| Nhi'inde aniahora-niala ' a riy liawanni la ' a Yahudi kreini-iskolli genni re , me umuki-uma'ala totpena rtikil doinia pesiayni . A ralmu nha'ar doin meman la ira pa ghapartikil nohora memna la leta-let mak ha rden la hairi dom to ' a .
Whereupon as I traveled to Damascus with the authority and commission from the chief priests , ||| Lera ida ne , de agodia horat maka imam-imam o'tani-matni ha rtapla hiwliai pa godi lia Damsik totpa umuki-uma'ala mak kpesiay Yesus re .
at noon , O king , I saw on the way a light from the sky , brighter than the sun , shining around me and those who traveled with me . ||| Ne la'pa adien ma'ta la talan letgara , de lera nwawuau ro'onni . Noma tuna , umkek nana wriai liawna id la lyanti de hitni-reparni rehia lera . Wriai hita-repar , de nle'lu rer a ' u me riy maka agora talla re wali .
When we had all fallen to the earth , I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language , ‘ Saul , Saul , why are you persecuting me ? It is hard for you to kick against the goads . ' ||| A honona mapru'wu la yawa . Noma utlina lira id nakot mai a ' u de nnairia yawala Ibrani pa npol mai a ' u niwra , Saulus , Saulus ee ! Hya ' a nrei pia omumuki-muma'al A ' u ? ! Pena orgahamu mumkek mehramu , yoma o matrommu ed maka ha mumuki-muma'ala de .
I said , ‘ Who are you , Lord ? ' He said , ‘ I am Jesus , whom you are persecuting . ||| Noma utiana , He ' O ' a Matrome ? Noma Itmatromlawanni Nwahla li'ru , A ' di de Yesus , mak omumuki-muma'ala .
But arise , and stand on your feet , for I have appeared to you for this purpose , to appoint you a servant and a witness both of the things which you have seen and of the things which I will reveal to you , ||| Mumat pa mupriri . Atiutga ino'nu tiy o ' a yoma Agiwra rian o ' pa mlia ' a hopopan mai A ' u . Mlia ' pa muod kot la riy dom to ' a la ' a hya ' maka omutlin nohora-mmuat nohora ler di la A wawnu , ne la ' a hya ' mak hota Atiutga la o ' a la ' a ler li'iru .
delivering you from the people and from the Gentiles , to whom I send you , ||| Hota Agolin doin o ' la ' a hairi Israel me la ' walia hairi-hairi dom to ' a mak Yahudi atia ' . Ghopna mlia ' ir de
to open their eyes , that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God , that they may receive remission of sins and an inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in me . ' ||| pa mpuer matni me mhu'ula tlinni re , totpena rhargot la melmelli pa rler la lelerni , yoma hegana amlawanni edon nodi plolli owa'an la ira , mere rler la Uplerlawna limni ralamni . La'pa rpesiay A ' u totpena A'umou-uwitna do ' a-hal maka ir rhi ' oleka re , ne hota hare rwal lia Uplerlawna limni-rorni maka Ha Nwalir niana .
Therefore , King Agrippa , I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision , ||| Tuna Agripa , aliernohor memna hya ' maka aliernan oleka la Yesus lirni la yamke'ku de . A ' g edonna ude ' a Uplerlawna lirni la riy ,
but declared first to them of Damascus , at Jerusalem , and throughout all the country of Judea , and also to the Gentiles , that they should repent and turn to God , doing works worthy of repentance . ||| mere ukot la re totpa rhoitio'ora-rtahnei dioinia do'oni-halli re , me rma rodia inonni la Uplerlawna . Lera-lera nekpa hihi'ini-yapyapni nhiolli-lietni re ploloi-plele'era totpa rtutga la mormiorni-dardiarni ralamni , de rhoitio'ora-rtahnei oleka do'oni-halli pa rmai lia Uplerlawna limni ralamni olekwa . La ' a hari de a'ukot ulga la Damsik , pa nhorwua noma la Yerusalem me la ' a Yudea uhunu-ewatni me la ' walia riy mak Yahudi atia ' a .
For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me . ||| La ' hade pede riy Yahudi rtorna a lia Uplerlawna roma kreini , ne rna'ohma pa rwen a ' u .
Having therefore obtained the help that is from God , I stand to this day testifying both to small and great , saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would happen , ||| Mere Uplerlawna edonna Nolin limni mai a ' pua , la'pa ler di de a ' g e tiutrier mia'ta pa ukot nohora la riy lalawna honona , me riy ku'uni-ke'eni honona . La ' to ' a hya ' mak a'ukota ri , de edonna nhal la makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni , me la ' walia Musa lirni ,
how the Christ must suffer , and how , by the resurrection of the dead , he would be first to proclaim light both to these people and to the Gentiles . ||| de emkadilla , hota Ray mak ha rnel tiar die pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori de hota Nler la yamuki-yama'ala la'pa Nmati , me hota Enpanulga la Nmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni . Totpa la ' hade pa Enakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni mak emolmolla lelerni totpa riy Yahudi me riy maka Yahudi atia ' a rler la mormiori-lewlewna ralamni .
As he thus made his defense , Festus said with a loud voice , Paul , you are crazy ! Your great learning is driving you insane ! ||| La'pa Paulus nakotkot reria nniaheri-nniahelatni de , dewade Festus nhaun pa nakot la , Hoi , o e mga ' u Paulusa . Lirmu-yatmu rodi olek o ' la leplepa-kakakma pi ' u-ga ' u .
But he said , I am not crazy , most excellent Festus , but boldly declare words of truth and reasonableness . ||| Mere Paulus nakot la , A ' g edonna ulepa-ukakma tuna . Maka ukota ri , de lira plola me ha rlergot lola o'ta kriahlu mak kamtemtemna .
For the king knows of these things , to whom also I speak freely . For I am persuaded that none of these things is hidden from him , for this has not been done in a corner . ||| Marna Agripa natga plu'unu-plehenu olek hare wa . La hade pede apuaran pia ukot momuoga a li'ru la ' a Yesusa . Agatga de hari id mana edonna nayade ' la matro'mu , yoma hari honona de edonna rhi ' a la ' a gen miaka kayade ' a .
King Agrippa , do you believe the prophets ? I know that you believe . ||| Marna-wuhura Agripa mak a ' u'unni-umta'ata ghu'ru-ghelma ahormata-kanala la ' a moratmu tutnu me lia'armu nayanni . Matro'mu npesiay hya ' maka lerni la makwohorulu-ktatrulu rakot taru re toh ? !
Agrippa said to Paul , With a little persuasion are you trying to make me a Christian ? ||| Noma Agripa nwahla Paulus tianni , La ' o wniarormu de alia ' agama Kristen de hakampa ?
Paul said , I pray to God , that whether with little or with much , not only you , but also all that hear me today , might become such as I am , except for these bonds . ||| Paulus niwra , La'pa dodo'ondi me mahnek ma'ta , pena awuak la Uplerlawna totpena marna-wuhura nora tuna-tuna hononmi mak katlin oleka re , de awuak lilili-mamuau pua mliernohor a ' u . Meman neka la ' a ranti di , de taken niana mliernohor a ' u .
The king rose up with the governor and Bernice , and those who sat with them . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma ray liawna , me Gubernur me Bernike me riy honona rtutrier pia
When they had withdrawn , they spoke to one another , saying , This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds . ||| rla'awa tio'ora pa idma nakot la ida , Riy de , edonna nhi ' a-nyapia lira-tun muak kodia la niukum matmiati , onde rkenia la roma nhio'la .
Agrippa said to Festus , This man might have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar . ||| Noma Agripa nakot la Festus , Festus , plollolli de riy di rolin doinia la wa . Mere nwak olek pa rhudi-rpara lirni-tunnu la watghudi Kaisar , rieiniande hota nla ' a Kaisar .
When it was determined that we should sail for Italy , they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius , of the Augustan band . ||| La'pa retlia pa hota am mhopal la Italia noma rala Paulus nor wutga riy ida-woru mak kden la roma nhio'la la Yolius , makla ' o'ta la makodi keki-rautu rahu ida perwira . Makodi keki-rautu rahu ida re la resimen di nhi'inde rweta la Resimen Kaisar .
Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium , which was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia , we put to sea , Aristarchus , a Macedonian of Thessalonica being with us . ||| Amha'at la kapil mak kwatiawu Adramitium pa amloh momuoga hera-nan mak kden la Asia yapatni . Aristarkus makden Makedonia ida , nwatiawua Tesalonika pa nor rewre'wa wali am tialla .
The next day , we touched at Sidon . Julius treated Paul kindly and gave him permission to go to his friends and refresh himself . ||| La'pa repar wa de amte'ela Sidon . Yolius nhi ' kalwiedweda Paulus , de nhur dioinia Paulus pa nla ntomra-nnah ' a mutwualli mak kden hande , totpena niwa nwak hadom la re , de nlernana .
Putting to sea from there , we sailed under the lee of Cyprus , because the winds were contrary . ||| Ampatiawu hande pa amhopal pa nodi liarni . Yoma anni nlola a gai rieran mamni , pede ampapan nohora noha Siprus totpena yana amlernana anni .
When we had sailed across the sea which is off Cilicia and Pamphylia , we came to Myra , a city of Lycia . ||| Nhorwua noma amleretia Kilikia nora Pamfilia rletni pa amte'ela leta Mira la ' Likia yapatni .
There the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy , and he put us on board . ||| La ' hande noma Resimen Kaisar o'tani de nwaten am lia kapil mak kwatiawu Aleksandaria ne mak kiwra nla'awa Italia .
When we had sailed slowly many days , and had come with difficulty opposite Cnidus , the wind not allowing us further , we sailed under the lee of Crete , opposite Salmone . ||| Mahnek am lia nhiopal ralma , neknanamde amte'ela olieta la leta Knidus . Yoma anni lawan rehia , a kapil mamni nnera pa amlola wali tranan la noha Kreta , pa amleretia Salmone tutnu , totpena amayehew lia anni .
With difficulty sailing along it we came to a certain place called Fair Havens , near the city of Lasea . ||| Yo'ora-anni natutga am lia noh de onni pa mahnek memna , neknanamde amte'ela geni ida nanni Her Linni . Edon olieta la leta Lasea .
When much time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous because the Fast had now already gone by , Paul admonished them ||| Mahnek memna am lia nhiopal ralma pede la'pa amte'ela hande , de lerlalawna maka nhi'inde riy Yahudi ratahan lara nhorg olekwa , pede woki lerni oleka . Hota ami edonna mlernan oleka lina-lera la mai nhiopla emkadi , pede Paulus nala nnio ' a-niat lia re niwra ,
and said to them , Sirs , I perceive that the voyage will be with injury and much loss , not only of the cargo and the ship , but also of our lives . ||| Ama-hyal miy re , la a wniaro'ru de yana itsopal pa tod ita liarni . Yoma hota emkadi mamaini , de itlernana kowlora-pah ' a meti . Hota it yodni-yalli rmolu me it kapalli niata . Rerehniande it aranni mana nmolu .
But the centurion gave more heed to the master and to the owner of the ship than to those things which were spoken by Paul . ||| Mere perwir de npesiay tio ' a yormudi nora orkapli ne edonna natlin la Paulus lirni kuku ' a .
Because the haven was not suitable to winter in , the majority advised going to sea from there , if by any means they could reach Phoenix and winter there , which is a port of Crete , looking southwest and northwest . ||| Pnialgen mak kden hande yata yoma kapli-kapli taken niana rapnial lia la'pa nmai lia woki lerni . La emkade pede kapli matrosni liawanni rwayow pa rhopal pa rodi liarni , yana rapnial lia pnialgeni die yoma riwra rtota pa rodi liarni la Feniks totpena rden nek la hande pa rawait nohora woki lerni nlardoinla . Feniks de pnialgenia mak kden la Kreta napal tiarga tranna-warta , nora ra'wiarta .
When the south wind blew softly , supposing that they had obtained their purpose , they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete , close to shore . ||| La ' ler de de anni newnewlia tranan deulu pede mak kar lia kapli ratnieka e nalina pa rwairi owa'ana watgorniha pa rhopal pa rpapan nohora noha Kreta .
But before long , a stormy wind beat down from shore , which is called Euroclydon . ||| La'pa edon nalo'on wali ne anin lawna maka nhi'inde riwra kakmorna mak kwatiawua noha wali tipru , pa lol noha wawannu pa nmai die nodia oranni .
When the ship was caught and could n't face the wind , we gave way to it and were driven along . ||| Yoma kapli ta'en niana nawtutg anni pa nhopal pa nodi liarni , de amolin doini kapli pa nner to ' a pa nlernohora anni .
Running under the lee of a small island called Clauda , we were able , with difficulty , to secure the boat . ||| A kapal mamni nayahew nian olek la noha'na Kauda walli tranna , mere nhi'pa trema-trema am ta'eni amhed nian a iskut mamni .
After they had hoisted it up , they used cables to help reinforce the ship . Fearing that they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars , they lowered the sea anchor , and so were driven along . ||| La'pa amhedga kapli iskutni nhor diemade rnairi tali pa rala rewan nan kapli inonni pa ralla rhi ' aruria de . Onnila ramta'ata ranera pa rnen tiar lia lai Sirtis , ralernia kapli larni ne kapli nnera pa nlernohora anni .
As we labored exceedingly with the storm , the next day they began to throw things overboard . ||| Yo'ora-anni yeher to ' a na'ititar rer lia pa la'awa repar noma rhoplierliernia yohya ' a kapli mniotni la tah ' i lawna .
On the third day , they threw out the ship 's tackle with their own hands . ||| Lera id owa'an dewade mak kar lia kapli rmeh ' a rhoplierliernia kapli manarni la tah ' i lawna .
When neither sun nor stars shone on us for many days , and no small storm pressed on us , all hope that we would be saved was now taken away . ||| La ' krei ida-woru rlardoinla ami edonna mamkek nana lera-wtiona , ne yo'ora-anni nten pia nodi liarni pede amparora de tah ' i nlol oleka tier muamni .
When they had been long without food , Paul stood up in the middle of them and said , Sirs , you should have listened to me , and not have set sail from Crete and have gotten this injury and loss . ||| Mahnek meman wal pia ya'an edonna-niemnu edonna . Noma Paulus la ntutrier lia hare gaini pa nakot la re , Ama-hyal miy re ! La'pa mliernohor oleka a li'ru pa edonna tsopal lola Kreta mana , it edonna tlernana ruki me riwtu-hora ri honona .
Now I exhort you to cheer up , for there will be no loss of life among you , but only of the ship . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de awuak lilili-mamuau tiy miy yan mimta'at kuku ' eti . Yoma la ' miy hononmi de taken niana riy id mana nmati . Mere it kapalli di nanpa hota natniepar wehlihi me nadgaur wat muetma .
For there stood by me this night an angel , belonging to the God whose I am and whom I serve , ||| Yoma orawia umkek nana Uplerlawna mak akola tieru-gawur nehla de , me mak aghi ' hopopan la de , hopopanni-lili'irnu nma nakot mai a ' u .
saying , ‘ Do n't be afraid , Paul . You must stand before Caesar . Behold , God has granted you all those who sail with you . ' ||| Niwra , Paulus ! Yan mumta'ata yoma Uplerlawna Netlia de hota o ' mlia mpuatrom la Kaisar gaini pa netlia o plolmu-halmu . Me hota Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pa riy honona maka muora mhiopal wutu ri edonna rler la yatyatni yoma la o ' a .
Therefore , sirs , cheer up ! For I believe God , that it will be just as it has been spoken to me . ||| La ' hade pede apuaran pia ukot miy , yan mimta'ata . Yoma apuesiaya Uplerlawna , de hya ' to ' a maka hopopanni-lili'irnu nakot olek mai a ' u de hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana-nyap niana .
But we must run aground on a certain island . ||| Mere hota itakniekar la noha id metni wawannu .
But when the fourteenth night had come , as we were driven back and forth in the Adriatic Sea , about midnight the sailors surmised that they were drawing near to some land . ||| Amloloi-mpalpial niana lera-mela pa termida wehrani wogata la ' a Adria lorni . Edonna ghal de mela letgara ne mak kar lia kapli ra'eram nana kapli e nrehgor oleka noha metni kerna .
They took soundings and found twenty fathoms . After a little while , they took soundings again , and found fifteen fathoms . ||| Pede rhurgernia watliota pa ra rlot haru kdielamni , de kdielamni re ' a terampwogata . Edon nalo'on wali ne rlot owa'ana de kdielamni re ' a termida wehrani wo'awa .
Fearing that we would run aground on rocky ground , they let go four anchors from the stern , and wished for daylight . ||| Pa ramta'at hota kapli nakniekar la nana wawannu noma ralernia watgorniha wogata la kapli li'irnu pa ra rpal tiarga . Me edon ranin matni pa rwei-rnara repar rauria .
As the sailors were trying to flee out of the ship and had lowered the boat into the sea , pretending that they would lay out anchors from the bow , ||| Mak kar lia kapli rwaror wunwunamnu pa rawlar dioinia kapalli . Ralernia iskutni de rtot pa ralernia lol kapli gaini pa emolmolla e ralernia watgorniha .
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers , Unless these stay in the ship , you ca n't be saved . ||| Noma Paulus nakot la perwira nor wutga limni-rorni mak kden kapli niwra , Ama-hyal miy re , la'pa mak kar lia kapli re rawlar dioinia kapalli di , hota miy hononmi edonna mliewan la matmiati .
Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat and let it fall off . ||| La ' hade pede lima-rora makodi keki-rautu re rtetietia iskuta talli pa nanera .
While the day was coming on , Paul begged them all to take some food , saying , Today is the fourteenth day that you wait and continue fasting , having taken nothing . ||| La'pa reprepar reria , dewade Paulus nhopan pa a hononami ma'ana-memnu . Paulus niwra , Ama-hyali miy re , la ' a lera-mela termida wehrani wogat memna de ama-hyali miy hononmi edonna mi'ina yoma mimta'at memna .
Therefore I beg you to take some food , for this is for your safety , for not a hair will perish from any of your heads . ||| Pa a'ukot tiy miy , mi'in tek oke ' a totpena mia'ala rurmi-laimi . Yoma hota hononmi mlier owa'an la kalwiedni me edonna hoho ' a-wakwakmi la hanekneka .
When he had said this and had taken bread , he gave thanks to God in the presence of all , then he broke it and began to eat . ||| La'pa nakot hade pa nhorwua noma na'ala roti na'nama na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna la riy honona gaini pa nhorwua noma nhawi-nhawia noma na'ana oke'ela .
Then they all cheered up , and they also took food . ||| Hononami mahmuakr owa'ana ne mor pa ma'an rewre'wa .
In all , we were two hundred seventy-six souls on the ship . ||| Riy honona mak kden la kapil de , de riy rahu woru terampwo'itu , wehrani wonema .
When they had eaten enough , they lightened the ship , throwing out the wheat into the sea . ||| La'pa hononami ma'an pa mpeher wa , noma rhopliala kapli yodni wetra ' lawna la ' tah ' i lawna totpena kapli napranrana .
When it was day , they did n't recognize the land , but they noticed a certain bay with a beach , and they decided to try to drive the ship onto it . ||| La'pa lera matni npah ' a dewade mak kar lia kapli ramkek noha nkerna-nhau mere raplin mua'ta hya ' noha de . Ramkek nana her lelie ' u id nora eni plalahwa . Ratekal pa ra rpal lia hande .
Casting off the anchors , they left them in the sea , at the same time untying the rudder ropes . Hoisting up the foresail to the wind , they made for the beach . ||| Noma rtetietia watgorniha re wogata talli pa rolin doinia la . Kopiau talli nek de rtet dioin wal lia . Nhor nia'nama rhedga lar no ' a kapli gaini la heyanna totpena anni nodia la keranni .
But coming to a place where two seas met , they ran the vessel aground . The bow struck and remained immovable , but the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves . ||| Mere kapli nawa ' u tar lia lai kierna wawannu nhi'nande kapli edonna nwo'la , pede li'irnu de yo'ora natipu-nato ' weyata la geni .
The soldiers ' counsel was to kill the prisoners , so that none of them would swim out and escape . ||| Makodi keki-rautu re rwaror pa rwunu-rwenna riy nhio'la re , yanhi'pa rnan pia rawlari .
But the centurion , desiring to save Paul , stopped them from their purpose , and commanded that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go toward the land , ||| Mere makhi ' o'tani la makodi keki-rautu re nodi etia ira wniarorni , yoma niwa nalewna Paulus . Nhopan pa mak katu knani rala ' ul pua rnehgerun pa rnan lia keranni .
and the rest should follow , some on planks and some on other things from the ship . So they all escaped safely to the land . ||| Ne totpa korni re rnan niohora kapli ananni , dom de rodi ordeulu-audeulu mak kdella kapli pa rmai lia keranni . La emkade pede a hononami mlewan la keranni .
When we had escaped , then they learned that the island was called Malta . ||| La'pa honona amlewan la keranni na'nama amatga de noh de nanni Malta .
The natives showed us uncommon kindness , for they kindled a fire and received us all , because of the present rain and because of the cold . ||| Riy mak khol lia noh de ratu rholi-rlet la mai ami , de radunia ai pa amamriria , yoma otna nturu pa woki lawna .
But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them on the fire , a viper came out because of the heat and fastened on his hand . ||| Paulus nawoka ora-au pa nkenia la ai . Noma naplin niana niy ida nawrikgot la ai pahnani pa nihiya Paulus limni .
When the natives saw the creature hanging from his hand , they said to one another , No doubt this man is a murderer , whom , though he has escaped from the sea , yet Justice has not allowed to live . ||| La'pa noh de mniotni ramkek nana niy die natniakloi lia Paulus limni noma idma nakot la ida , Hei , matiala riy di mak kwunu-kwenna rimormiori id hadi . Yoma nlewan olek lol lora , mere hegana patke ' a marna-ornoha dewa edonna nolin nihini la .
However he shook off the creature into the fire , and was n't harmed . ||| Mere Paulus nkakan doinia niy diella ai ralamni . Ne edonna na'eram nana mehrani wali .
But they expected that he would have swollen or fallen down dead suddenly , but when they watched for a long time and saw nothing bad happen to him , they changed their minds and said that he was a god . ||| Ir wniarorni de hota edon nalo'on wali ne Paulus limni npetna , onde plinu-plinnianamde hota Paulus nlitir pa nmati . Mere la'pa rwei pia mahnek rehia ne Paulus edon nlernana hadomdoma , noma rwaldioinia ralma-riorni pa riwra Paulus di , de hegan marna muanke ' a ornoha ida di .
Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the chief man of the island , named Publius , who received us and courteously entertained us for three days . ||| Edon olieta la hande , de Publius mak kodi plolli la noh de , nohananni id etla hande . Nrei kalwieda-paitiot nan am pia amden la romni la ' a lera wotelu .
The father of Publius lay sick of fever and dysentery . Paul entered in to him , prayed , and laying his hands on him , healed him . ||| La ' ler de de Publius amni e namehra-namau lia nnienia tema pniahna me wniahiwra-wnialalli . Paulus nla kamri pa namkeka mak kamehra de , noma nsumbain la , pa nran limni la wawannu noma nkalwied wa .
Then when this was done , the rest also who had diseases in the island came and were cured . ||| La'pa ornoha ramkek emkade noma mak kamehra-kamau honona rmai momuou pua Paulus nsumbainia re pa rkalwieda .
They also honored us with many honors , and when we sailed , they put on board the things that we needed . ||| Rodia himimni-rere'eni mai ami me la'pa amiwa mhopal wa , de rodia hya'-hya ' maka ampaka la ira , totpena la kapli de ami ma'ana lol lora .
After three months , we set sail in a ship of Alexandria which had wintered in the island , whose figurehead was The Twin Brothers . ||| Amden la hande pa wolla wotelu , noma amhopal pa amla'awa amodia kapli mak kwatiawua Aleksandaria , mak kapnial niek la ' noh de la ' a woki lerni . Kapil de nnairia kniau mak kakot nohora hegana marna ornoha maka kadio ' a , de Kastor nora Poluks .
Touching at Syracuse , we stayed there three days . ||| Amhopal la'pa amapnial lia leta Sirkus pa lera wotelu .
From there we circled around and arrived at Rhegium . After one day , a south wind sprang up , and on the second day we came to Puteoli , ||| Amden la hande pa amhopal la noha plahwani pa amla'awa Regium . Repar dewade anni nteni nwatiawua tranna , pa lera wor wua dewade amte'ela leta Putioli .
where we found brothers , and were entreated to stay with them for seven days . So we came to Rome . ||| La hande de ampatrom nana riy ida-woru maka kpesiay Yesus . Noka rpolg am pia amden wut lia ira pa malo'on nana krei ida ralamni . Noma amokru letlawna Roma .
From there the brothers , when they heard of us , came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns . When Paul saw them , he thanked God and took courage . ||| Makpesiay Yesus riy ida-woru mak kden la Roma ratlin nan am nioma rmai wia geni miaka kwawa Ya'olgeni Apius , me la ' a gen id wali nanni Roma Tniau Geni Wotelu totpa rwatrom ami . La ' pa Paulus nwatroma re , noma na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna me ralamni naruri-nalai toto ' la Uplerlawna .
When we entered into Rome , the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard , but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him . ||| La'pa amte'ela Roma noma makodi keki-rautu o'tani nhuria Paulus pa nden la roma ida nor wut lia makodi keki-rautu ida totpena natiak reria Paulus .
After three days Paul called together those who were the leaders of the Jews . When they had come together , he said to them , I , brothers , though I had done nothing against the people or the customs of our fathers , still was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans , ||| La'pa lera wotel wua noma Paulus npolga Yahudi o'tani-matni mak kdella la gen die . La'pa rawok wa noma nakot la re , Ama-hyali , miy hononmi . A ' g edonna ghi ' do ' a-uyap hial la ' a ita hair wali , la ' wali a ' g edonna udunti-uwetria ita deullu-tatarni mak itlernana la it upni-tgarni . Emkade ho'mana rtorna a lia Yerusalem pa rodi a lia riy mak kden Roma .
who , when they had examined me , desired to set me free , because there was no cause of death in me . ||| La ' pa rhudia a lia o'ta-mat lalawna gaini mere riwa rol a lia yoma a ' g edonna ghi ' a-yapia do ' a-hal mak kod a pua rukum pen a ' u .
But when the Jews spoke against it , I was constrained to appeal to Caesar , not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation . ||| Mere yoma Yahudi rhoka-rhoka a ' u , nhi'nande awuak de rod niek a lia mak ktorna watghudia la ' a Kaisar Roma . Mere a ' g edonna tio'ona a hair wa'lu .
For this cause therefore I asked to see you and to speak with you . For because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain . ||| Ne la ' hade pede awuak pa itwatrom la handi pa twahaur nohora a wniu'tu-knioh ' u onnila Ray mak kamori-kalewna Israel mak Uplerlawna Nano'taru rerieini .
They said to him , We neither received letters from Judea concerning you , nor did any of the brothers come here and report or speak any evil of you . ||| Noma rakot la Paulus , Ami edonna mlernan ma'ta horta-hairi mak kwatiawua Yudea pa nakot nohora o ' la hadi . Yahudi id mana mak kmai oleka de edon nwahaur nohora o halmu wali .
But we desire to hear from you what you think . For , as concerning this sect , it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against . ||| Mere amiwra matlin walia omukot nohora pesiaymi de yala'ani . Yoma amatlin oleka de riy makden la meni-meni to ' pa rhi ' amola-ma ' a o wniatutmu mak omuora mutmu re miodia .
When they had appointed him a day , many people came to him at his lodging . He explained to them , testifying about God 's Kingdom , and persuading them concerning Jesus , both from the law of Moses and from the prophets , from morning until evening . ||| Noma rora Paulus rna'ohma targa lera id pa rwatrom owa'ana . La ' ler de de riy rahu rmai lia rom maka Paulus handella . Yawyawar ma'ta pa nodia pa lera ntuini , Paulus nwahaur nohor la emkameni Uplerlawna Nodi plolli de emekwalia Ray . Nwahaur de nahmir rer lia hya ' maka ha rakot targa la Musa pukni ralamni me la ' walia mak ha rhorat targa la makwohorulu-ktatrulu pukni re . Paulus naduran memna la totpena rpesiay Yesus de , Ray maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pua Namori-nalewna rimormiori .
Some believed the things which were spoken , and some disbelieved . ||| E rpesiay walia hya ' maka Paulus ha nakota . Mere riy doma edonna rpesiay walia .
When they did n't agree among themselves , they departed after Paul had spoken one message , The Holy Spirit spoke rightly through Isaiah the prophet to our fathers , ||| La ' a wniarora-wnialai mak kapahokar tar die pa nreiniande ranewar wa . Mere edon rla ' ma'ta de Paulus nakot nohora emkadilla niwra , Emkadilla plollolli meman la Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli lirni la it upni-tgarni . Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Napre'et Yesaya nurnu pa niwra ,
saying , ‘ Go to this people and say , in hearing , you will hear , but will in no way understand . In seeing , you will see , but will in no way perceive . ||| Uplerlawna lirni , Mlier pa mlia'awa mukot la hair di , hota mitlin pa nodi liarni mere miplinu-miplo ' a . Hota mlina-miat reria mere miplinga hota hya ' a de .
For this people 's heart has grown callous . Their ears are dull of hearing . Their eyes they have closed . Lest they should see with their eyes , hear with their ears , understand with their heart , and would turn again , then I would heal them . ' ||| Yoma la ' a hair Israel ri ra ' o'ta tehra . Yatlinni nmanu wa me yamkekni npon wa . Rhi ' emkadi totpena matni yan namkeka me tlinni yan natlina . Wniarorni yan naplahwa ne yan ralamni nakwiali pa nawal mai A ' u totpena hota A ' g ed maka khi ' kalwieda .
Be it known therefore to you that the salvation of God is sent to the nations , and they will listen . ||| Hade pede totpa ama-hyali miy hononmi miatga , de la mak ha rakot nohora la yamori-yalewna mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna maka mihmena mitlina ne mliernohora , dodo'ondi alia ' pa a'ukot oleka la hairi-hairi mak Yahudi atia ' a . Ne hota ratlina ne rlernohora .
When he had said these words , the Jews departed , having a great dispute among themselves . ||| La'pa Paulus nakot emkade noma riy Yahudi re ranewar wa de rawo'or nohora Paulus lirni .
Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house and received all who were coming to him , ||| Paulus nalo'on nana anni woru la ' Roma , ndella rom mak orgahani npairia . Ralamni naple'er meman la riy rahu mak ktomra-knah ' a e ' a .
preaching God 's Kingdom and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness , without hindrance . ||| Nparan mieman la nakot nohora la emkameni la Uplerlawna Nodi plolli emeka Ray ne la ' a Itmatromni Yesus Kristus . Paulus nakot nohora hare de edon namta'ata haneka-harah wawannu . Mere riy id mana edonna nhi ' a yawuhi-yawe'eta la gaini .
Paul , a servant of Jesus Christ , called to be an apostle , set apart for the Good News of God , which he promised before through his prophets in the holy Scriptures , concerning his Son , who was born of the offspring of David according to the flesh , who was declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of holiness , by the resurrection from the dead , Jesus Christ our Lord , through whom we received grace and apostleship for obedience of faith among all the nations for his name 's sake , among whom you are also called to belong to Jesus Christ , to all who are in Rome , beloved of God , called to be saints , Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi mak kden la Roma ! Mak khorat horat di , de a ' u , Paulusa , mak kla ' Yesus Kristus hopopanni-lili'irnu . Uplerlawna orgahani ed mak kwaliri-kwalioh nan a ' pua Nhopn a lia ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota de , mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna . Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de Uplerlawna ed mak kano'targ hade la ' ululu memna la ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu nabi . Ir er maka rhorat tar la Puk Lululli ralamni . La ' a Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota de enakot nohora A'nani , Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus . La'pa tamkek la rimormiori wawannu , de E ' de ray Daud duratni-waitni E ' a . Mere la'pa tamkek la Orgahi-Orha ' a , de E ' de Uplerlawna A'nani E ' a . Uplerlawna ed mak ktut muemna hade la ' ler maka e Nnairi E Nhiw Lululli pa Namori owa'an Yesus la matmiati ralamni . Uplerlawna Ntut wualia ralam kalwiedni mai a pua Nwalir nian alia ' mak kodia E lirni-tunnu , totpena hota awuatutu-wuaye ' a hairi-hairi maka Yahudi atia ' a re pa ratu ratlina-ratailla E lirni-tunnu onnila ir pesiayni la E ' a , totpena Enlernana ya'uli-yawedi . Uplerlawna Ntutga ralam kalwiedni de mai a ' u onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini mai a ' u . Ne mak kden la Roma miy miana , Uplerlawna Npolg olek wali miy pia mlier teman la Yesus Kristus mutnu-rahanu . Pede ina-nara ama-hyali maka Uplerlawna Nsaynia , me maka Uplerlawna Npolga pa mhi ' a E mutnu-rahanu , agal horat di tiy miy . Awuak de Uplerlawna , it Amlawanni de , Nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy .
First , I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you , that your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , maka a'ukot ulga de , onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini mai ita pede a ' u'uli-uwedi it Uplerlawanni , yoma la ' a meni-meni to ' pa rakot nohora la ' a miy pesiaymi e naruri olek la Yesus Kristus de pede riy ratlin nana .
For God is my witness , whom I serve in my spirit in the Good News of his Son , how unceasingly I make mention of you always in my prayers , ||| Asiumbain de aghorat rer miy . Uplerlawna orgahani ed maka Ha Natlin reria li'ru ri . Id mana edonna u'itra-ulawna . Uplerlawan de ed maka aghima-rie ' a E kniarni de agal toto ' memna a ralmu pa agala ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a A'nani Yesus Kristus .
requesting , if by any means now at last I may be prospered by the will of God to come to you . ||| Uplerlawna Nat niohor de nhi'inde asiumbain rer miy . Ne awuak de hota Uplerlawna Nal talan ma ' a pua totpena atiy tiomra-niah ' a miy . Yoma mahnek oleka la a ' g edon liernan talan pa atiy .
For I long to see you , that I may impart to you some spiritual gift , to the end that you may be established , ||| Yoma awuakwak totpa alia ' miy die totpena aghi ' aruri miy pesiaymi .
that is , that I with you may be encouraged in you , each of us by the other 's faith , both yours and mine . ||| A ralma-rio'ru de totpena a pesia'yu nod miy lia ga ' a me miy pesiaymi de nhi ' a pua uhepur nohora Uplerlawna totpena it rewre'wa pa idma nhi ' arur nian ida .
Now I do n't desire to have you unaware , brothers , that I often planned to come to you and was hindered so far , that I might have some fruit among you also , even as among the rest of the Gentiles . ||| Awuak de ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi totpena miat memna , de liawanni olek maka giwra tiy miy die , mere a ' g edon liernan talla . Mere agiwra tiy totpena a li'ru-tu'nu nodi miy pesiaymi la ga ' a pa emekwalima a knia'ru maka kodi olek riy maka Yahudi atia ' a la ' a geni-tiena dom to ' a pa rla ga ' a .
I am debtor both to Greeks and to foreigners , both to the wise and to the foolish . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nhopan pa alia ukot nohora Kot Kalwied de la riy maka kwatiawua hairi meni-meni to ' a , mak kla ' olek la iskola onde mak edon kla ' ma'ta , mak klernohora makden Yunani nhiolli-lietni me edonna .
So as much as is in me , I am eager to preach the Good News to you also who are in Rome . ||| La ' hade pede awuakwak totpa alia ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot di tiy miy la letlawna Roma wali .
For I am not ashamed of the Good News of Christ , because it is the power of God for salvation for everyone who believes , for the Jew first , and also for the Greek . ||| A ' g edon muola-mua ' a la ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de . Apuesiay memna , de kot de de Uplerlawna rurni-laini edade totpena na Namori-nalewna makpesiay honona , la ' a makden Yahudi re , me makden la Yahudi atia ' a wali . Kot Kalwied mak kodi yamori-yalewan de rakot nohor plein la makden Yahudi re nhor diewade la ' a riy maka Yahudi atia ' a re wali .
For in it is revealed God 's righteousness from faith to faith . As it is written , But the righteous shall live by faith . ||| Kot Kalwied de Uplerlawna rurni-laini edade yoma la ' a kot de Uplerlawna Nakot nohora emkameni la Enetlia rimormiori pa emeka riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni , totpena tora E ' pa it idma nla ' a-nmai id de la ' a kalwiedni-paitiotni . Talla kmeheni de , itpesiay to ' a la Uplerlawna . Hade emekwalima e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de riwra , Riy maka Uplerlawna Netlia de ror E ' a rkalwied owa'ana onnila ir pesiayni la E ' a de hota rmormiori pa nodi liarni .
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who suppress the truth in unrighteousness , ||| Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kden la Ilwo'itu-Darwionema , Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nalharia oleka de , hota hankeranni-ralmha'arni ntuin meman la riy maka kahmena katlina-katailla E ' a , me la ' walia riy mak khi ' a-kyapi do ' a-hala . Ir hihi'ini-yapyapni yatyatni-halalli de nwal lia oruli-augewat la pa rahew niana rimormiori gaini totpa edon ramkek nan talla plollola la Uplerlawna .
because that which is known of God is revealed in them , for God revealed it to them . ||| Yoma rimormiori rat niohora Uplerlawna ed rer lia yoma Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka ed mak kalhari olek hadella ' rimormiori it wa .
For the invisible things of him since the creation of the world are clearly seen , being perceived through the things that are made , even his everlasting power and divinity , that they may be without excuse . ||| Yoma la ' lerni la ' Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayapia nohkerna la'pa nma ntut lia ler di , Uplerlawna yehwani maka ta'an niana tamkek nana , de emekto ' a E yehwa Uplerlawanni me E plolli-mneheni mak kodi liarni , de rimormiori rat niohora , yoma ramkek nana hya ' ed maka Ha Nakoki-nayapi re . La ' hade pede rimormiori ta'en niana rwatikil pa riwra iraplin niohora Uplerlawna .
Because knowing God , they did n't glorify him as God , and did n't give thanks , but became vain in their reasoning , and their senseless heart was darkened . ||| Yoma plollolli de rimormiori re ratg oleka Uplerlawna etla . Mere hota emkade ho'mana rakleha nhiu'ru-nhielam ya'unni-yamta'ata la E ' a , me rakleh walia nhiorat pa ra'uli-rawedia rwak terima kasi la E ' a . Rwaldioinia de rimormiori wniarorni-wnialaini rwal lia makpodku , me ralma-riorni re rwal lia melmelli .
Professing themselves to be wise , they became fools , ||| Riwra ir er mak katu , mere raplin nieka la podaknu lola lelli .
and traded the glory of the incorruptible God for the likeness of an image of corruptible man , and of birds , four-footed animals , and creeping things . ||| Ir edonna rkola tieru-rawur nehla la ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mere maka ha rkola tieru-rawur nehla la de , de uplera-upmati maka rna'ihla la rimormiori , ma'nu , hamormior miaka kodia lakni wogata , me toki mlawa , niy rehla mak kawrika-kawriai . Ir rhi ' a emkade kennama Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu ed mak kodi plolli pa nodi liarni mere rimormiori nora hamormior honona re hota edon nalo'on wali ne rmati .
Therefore God also gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to uncleanness , that their bodies should be dishonored among themselves , ||| La ' hade pede Uplerlawna Nolin doini rla ralam wamueheni maka kodia ir la ralam yatyata maka kakdeha-kaktiahli re pede hota orgahi idma nhi ' a la ida hya ' mak kodi molmola-mama ' a .
who exchanged the truth of God for a lie , and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator , who is blessed forever . Amen . ||| Hya ' ed mak kaplola la ' a Uplerlawna , de ir edon rlernohora , mere rwaldioinia pa rhi ' a mak edonna kaplola . Ir edonna rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Makakoki-Kayapia nohkeran di nor lyanti , mere e ra'targho'ola mak Ha Nayap niana pa irkola tieru-rawur nehla la . La ' plollolli de Makakoki-Kayap die nampena ed maka ra'uli-rawedia pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
For this reason , God gave them up to vile passions . For their women changed the natural function into that which is against nature . ||| Rimormiori rhi ' emkare , pede Uplerlawna Nolin doinia rpa rlernohor neka ira ralam yatyata maka kakdeha-kaktiahli re . Pa hota patke ' a re nekane edonna emekneka maka rimormiori ha rhi ' taru , pa a'na muanke ' a nhi'inde ralamni nala a'na patke ' a , mere la hadi de a'na patke ' a idma ralamni nal ida .
Likewise also the men , leaving the natural function of the woman , burned in their lust toward one another , men doing what is inappropriate with men , and receiving in themselves the due penalty of their error . ||| La'pa a'na muanke ' a mana emkade wali . Ir edonna rlernohora plollolli pa ratiana a'na patke ' a mere orgahi ralamni na'hira pa ra'oin nan targho ' a a'na muanke ' a wali . Idma nhi ' amola-ma ' ida . La ' hade pede irlernana hihi'ini-yapyapni de wniahlani maka edonna npa'eini-npahal la ' a ira nhiolli-lietni mak kpohra-kgehpa de .
Even as they refused to have God in their knowledge , God gave them up to a reprobate mind , to do those things which are not fitting , ||| Ne la ' wali de , rimormiori re edonna rhe'du nana Uplerlawna pede Uplerlawna Nhur dioinia ir la kirkirni-ralma-riorni yatyatni-halalli mak kakdeha-kaktiahli pa reiniande ir edon rhi ' a-ryapia plollolli . La ' a plolli de yana ir rhi ' emkade .
being filled with all unrighteousness , sexual immorality , wickedness , covetousness , malice , full of envy , murder , strife , deceit , evil habits , secret slanderers , ||| Ir ihranu ralamni re rpenpuenu tetem la yatyatni-halalli mak kpenpuen niohora ralma-riora wniunu-wnienna , kokokna-rariarni , putra-palka , ra'ante ' a-rakamna ' a , id ralamni nod rer lia ida hyonni-hyanni , me idma na'un tar ida , idma nod niur lia ida .
backbiters , hateful to God , insolent , arrogant , boastful , inventors of evil things , disobedient to parents , ||| Rape'el toto ' meman la rwahaur pa ralernia rira nan kalwiedwedni . Ne ratulu-rapetna me rakleha yatota-yawawa mak kodia ir la ralam mehra la Uplerlawna , ne rpo'on atulu-apetna inonni . Ratu rwahaka hihi ' a-yapyapia warwuaru pa ra rna'ohma yatyatni-halalli . Rhoklira-rpah ' waw la inni-amni .
without understanding , covenant breakers , without natural affection , unforgiving , unmerciful , ||| Raplinu rwaror nohora hya'-hya ' a mak kaplola . Ta'en niana riy rpesiay ira . Ir rakleha nhiol kalwiedweda la ir rimormior wiali pa edon rtutga sniayanni la .
who , knowing the ordinance of God , that those who practice such things are worthy of death , not only do the same , but also approve of those who practice them . ||| Iratga de Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni niwra la'pa he ' ed mak klernohora nhioli-lieta yatyata re , de hota rukum penna de . Emkade wal ho'mana ir rhi ' ma'ta yotyotni-yatyatni ne rerehnian de irwayow nohora riy meheni mak khi ' walia nhioli-lieta re .
Therefore you are without excuse , O man , whoever you are who judge . For in that which you judge another , you condemn yourself . For you who judge practice the same things . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , hota emkameni la miy miwra mpiaghala rimormior wialmi ? ! Miy mieh ' a nek de e mikleha nhiapargen pia mpiatikil la plol wawna , yoma miy orgahami nek de mhi ' nhioli-lieta emeknekama ir rhi ' walia . Pede la'pa mpiaghal riy meheni , de miy orgahami e mieti olek walia niukum la miy inon wamuehemi .
We know that the judgment of God is according to truth against those who practice such things . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , itatga de hota la'pa Uplerlawna Nala niukamnu la riy maka khi ' a-kyapia nhioli-liet yatyata re , de Uplerlawna niukamnu de naplol toto ' memna .
Do you think this , O man who judges those who practice such things , and do the same , that you will escape the judgment of God ? ||| Pede la'pa mtio'ona riy meheni la ' a ir hihi'ini mak yatyata-halala , mere hota orgahami er mak khi ' nan yatyatni-halalli re wali , hota emkameni la ' a miy wniarormi de hota Uplerlawna edonna Nukum miy ? !
Or do you despise the riches of his goodness , forbearance , and patience , not knowing that the goodness of God leads you to repentance ? ||| Onde yanpa mpiarwah ' a Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni me la ' walia E ralma nhiurniohorni tiy miy pa miy edon mliernohor E ' a ? Yanpa miplin niohor ma'ta de Uplerlawna Ntutga ralam kalwiedni mak karehi miemna de , yoma Enwahaka miy totpa mhioitio'or doini-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi re .
But according to your hardness and unrepentant heart you are treasuring up for yourself wrath in the day of wrath , revelation , and of the righteous judgment of God , ||| Mere rwaldioinia de miy o'ta tehra pa miy edonna mpiayow pa miolli nhiolmi . La ' hade pede orgahami mi'itar rer lia do'omi-halmi niukamnu werweratni la ' a lera hohoni , mak hota Uplerlawna Ntutga hankeranni me Netlia niukamnu de ndella plol wawna .
who will pay back to everyone according to their works , ||| Yoma hota Uplerlawna Nwahla rira do'oni-halli de emekwalima ha rhi ' nan oleka wa .
to those who by perseverance in well-doing seek for glory , honor , and incorruptibility , eternal life , ||| De hota la ' a riy maka khi ' a-kyap reria hihi ' a-yapyapi plollolli yoma irahniar pia hota rlernana ya'uli-yawedi la ' a Uplerlawna la genia hitita-repreparni mak kodi liarni , de hota Uplerlawna Nala mormiori plalahwa la ' ira pa nodi liarni .
but to those who are self-seeking and do n't obey the truth , but obey unrighteousness , will be wrath , indignation , ||| Mere la'pa riy maka khorat rer tio ' a mormior wamueheni , ne edonna nlernohora Uplerlawna lirni mak kaplola mere nhi ' a-nyap reria yatyatni-halalli , de hota Uplerlawna Nala niukum werwerta la ira .
oppression , and anguish on every soul of man who does evil , to the Jew first , and also to the Greek . ||| Riy honona maka ralamni nod rer lia yatyatni-halalli , de hota rlernana mehra-mau liawna la'pa rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni . Plol toto ' a de mak klernan niukamnu de riy Yahudi miy , mere riy Yahudi atia ' rlernan wali .
But glory , honor , and peace go to every man who does good , to the Jew first , and also to the Greek . ||| La'pa riy maka kden rer lia wniehwa-liakta kalwieda-paitiota de hota rlernana ya'uli-yawedi la genia hitita-reprepra me kalwiedni-paitiotni la ' a Uplerlawna . Plol toto ' a de mak klernana hadi de Yahudi miy , mere riy Yahudi atia ' a rlernan wali .
For there is no partiality with God . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nhi ' la hare honona de ramneneha momuou .
For as many as have sinned without the law will also perish without the law . As many as have sinned under the law will be judged by the law . ||| Riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala , de hota ha rlernan Uplerlawna niukamnu pa rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa edon ror wutga Uplerlawna la ' geni ida . Makden Yahudi atia ' a re raplin niohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni , pede rukmua ir de edonna rlernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni . Mere riy Yahudi mak kat niohor oleka deulu-tatar de , hota rala deulu-tatar de pa ra rukmua re .
For it is n't the hearers of the law who are righteous before God , but the doers of the law will be justified ||| Yoma Uplerlawna edon Nwahaka mak katu agama deullu-tatarni mere edonna rlernohora . Enwahak riy mak klernohora hya'-hya ' honona maka ha rakot targa la deulu-tatar de ralamni .
for when Gentiles who do n't have the law do by nature the things of the law , these , not having the law , are a law to themselves , ||| Meman neka la riy maka Yahudi atia ' a raplin niohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni . Mere la'pa irmeh ' a riwra rlernohora hya ' ed mak kden la plol wawna de ha ntutga de Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni de namtemtemn olek la ' a ir ihranu ralamni , kennama iraplin niohor ma'ta agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni de .
in that they show the work of the law written in their hearts , their conscience testifying with them , and their thoughts among themselves accusing or else excusing them ||| Yahudi atia ' a re yehwani ed mak ktutga de Uplerlawna Nkeni oleka hya ' maka deulu-tatar ha nakota de la ir ihranu ralamni . Yoma la ir wniarorni re , irmeh ' a nek de lera dom de rwaghala inon wamueheni me lera dom de rhi ' aplola inon wamueheni re .
in the day when God will judge the secrets of men , according to my Good News , by Jesus Christ . ||| Ne hota la ' pa lerni ntutu-nte'ewa , de Uplerlawna hota Nala plolli-mneheni pa Kristus Yesus Ntorna watghudi ne Netlia rimormiori honona hihi'ini-yapyapni kirkirni-ralma-riorni . Mak kayade ' a mana Enetlia honona . Ne watghudi lokarni de ed mak a'ukot nohora la ' ler maka a'ukot nohor Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de la ' meni-meni to ' a .
Indeed you bear the name of a Jew , rest on the law , glory in God , ||| Mere la'pa dodo'ondi de , a nnio ' u-nia'tu hadi tiy ina-nara ama-hyal mak Yahudi miy . Miy miwra riy Yahudi miy pa miy miwniair la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni , me miy e mpiarehi inonmi yoma mimpiarora de miora Uplerlawna mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
know his will , and approve the things that are excellent , being instructed out of the law , ||| Mliernana wniatutu-wniaye ' a la deulu-tatra re , pede miat niohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , me miat niohora hameni mak kaplola , hameni edonna .
and are confident that you yourself are a guide of the blind , a light to those who are in darkness , ||| La ' miy wniarormi de miy er mak kalakra riy mak matni yata me miodia lelerni la riy mak kden la melli-kalamni .
a corrector of the foolish , a teacher of babies , having in the law the form of knowledge and of the truth . ||| Mimpiarora de miy er maka kwatutu-kwaye ' a makpodku me mimlia ' tungkur lia riy maka emeknekama keke'enku ' a pa raplin niohor ma'ta deulu-tatra . Mimpiaror emkade yoma mak Yahudi miy er maka klernana deulu-tatra agama mak kakot nohora kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou me hare honona maka plol memna .
You therefore who teach another , do n't you teach yourself ? You who preach that a man should n't steal , do you steal ? ||| Oi ! Miy e mpiatutu-mpiaye ' riy meheni . Mere hota emkameni la miy orgahami ? ! Miy mpiatut rira pa yana rkamnelu-rkamna ' a , noma orgahami nekpa mkiamnelu-mkiamna ' a ? !
You who say a man should n't commit adultery , do you commit adultery ? You who abhor idols , do you rob temples ? ||| Mpiatut rira pa yana ralira-raliai mere orgahami milira-miliai ? ! Miy e mpiatut rira pa yana rkola tieru-rawur nehla la uplera-upmati , mere miy orgahami er maka ka'ala uplera-upmati re la ' a gen maka riy rkola tieru-rawur nehla la re totpa mi'olga re ? !
You who glory in the law , do you dishonor God by disobeying the law ? ||| Mimpiarehia miwra mimliernan oleka deulu-tatra Musa mak kwatiawu Uplerlawna . Noma orgahami nekpa mipolu-miliella Uplerlawna yoma miy edonna mliernohora deullu-tatarni de !
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you , just as it is written . ||| Hade emeknekama maka ha rhorat targa la Puk ralamni de eniwra , Yoma la Yahudi miy wniehwami-liakatmi re , pede hairi-hairi korni ra'udlia kdedeha-ktialtiahli Uplerlawna nanni .
For circumcision indeed profits , if you are a doer of the law , but if you are a transgressor of the law , your circumcision has become uncircumcision . ||| La'pa mitlina-mitailla agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni , de hota sunat totpena mtiutga Uplerlawna gahani miy de e nperkun tiy miy . Mere la'pa miy edonna mitlina-mitail la ' a hya ' ed maka ha rakot nohora la deulu-tatar de , hota sunat de mana edonna nodia hadomdom tiy miy . De hota miy die emolmolan nekama makden Yahudi atia ' a maka edon ha rsunat yoma Uplerlawna gahani atia ' ira .
If therefore the uncircumcised keep the ordinances of the law , wo n't his uncircumcision be accounted as circumcision ? ||| La'pa Yahudi atia ' ida edonna rsunta , mere natlina-natailla Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni , de hade edonna nwal lia hadom la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni . Hota la Uplerlawna yamkekni , de emeknekama Yahudi atia ' re ha rsunat oleka .
Wo n't those who are physically uncircumcised , but fulfill the law , judge you , who with the letter and circumcision are a transgressor of the law ? ||| Me hota riy Yahudi atia ' a maka edonna rsunat ma'ta mere emkade ho'mana rlernohora Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni , de nhiolli-lietni re ntutga de Yahudi miy halmi . Yoma mliernan olek ulu deulu-tatra agama Yahudi , mere e rsunat olek miy ho'mana , miy e mpiera-mdiaiti oleka deulu-tatar de .
For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly , neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh , but he is a Jew who is one inwardly , and circumcision is that of the heart , in the spirit , not in the letter , whose praise is not from men , but from God . ||| Yoma maka ha riwra Yahudi plollolli , de Uplerlawna mutnu inhatta de , de yana riwra hornama rsunat inonni . Yoma sunat mak kaplollola de edon rhi ' to ' a la inonni pa rlernohora agama deullu-tatarni . Mere sunat mak kaplol memna de , de Uplerlawna Nhiwni kniarni la it ihranu ralamni , nayamkeka la it mormiorni ralamni . Ne Yahudi plollola de , riy maka khernu oleka yehwani . Riy mak emkare de rlernana ya'uli la Uplerlawna , kennama la rimormiori de edonna .
Then what advantage does the Jew have ? Or what is the profit of circumcision ? ||| Mere yanpa hota Yahudi dom de ratiana riwra , La'pa sunat de edon nodi Yahudi it pa tora Uplerlawna tkalwieda de hota sunat de nodi hya ' unut mai ita ? Ne hota tlernan unut hya ' a onnila it di de makden Yahudi ita ?
Much in every way ! Because first of all , they were entrusted with the revelations of God . ||| Plollolli de Yahudi it di tlernana unut lawna . La ' a idni de , yoma la ' ler ululu de Uplerlawna Nakot targa E lirni-tunnu la makden Yahudi ita .
For what if some were without faith ? Will their lack of faith nullify the faithfulness of God ? ||| Mere hota emkameni la ' a riy Yahudi re korni mak edonna kdenrer lia setia Uplerlawna nnio'oni ? Yanpa onnila ir hihi'ini pede Uplerlawna edonna Ndenrer lia hya ' ed maka Ha Nakot targ olek wa ?
May it never be ! Yes , let God be found true , but every man a liar . As it is written , that you might be justified in your words , and might prevail when you come into judgment . ||| Hade edon emkade ! Yoma Uplerlawan de oraplola-oramneha de ! La'pa riy honona rwotra-rtalia ho'mana , Uplerlawna Nden rer lia plol wawna . Hade emeknekama ha rhorat targ oleka la ' a Uplerlawna la Pukni ralamni de riwra , Hya ' a maka Omukota de nden rer lia plol wawna . Ne hota Omuplola la ' a nhiudi-pniara .
But if our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God , what will we say ? Is God unrighteous who inflicts wrath ? I speak like men do . ||| Mere yanpa Yahudi dom de riwra , Am mhi ' mak edon kaplola de ntutga de Uplerlawna ed mak kden rer lia plol wawna . Pede nihya'pa Uplerlawna Nukm owa'an ami ? Oi ! Plola lir de rimormiori wniarorni hade !
May it never be ! For then how will God judge the world ? ||| La'pa emkameni mana hade ematia ' a hade , yoma la'pa rwarora riwra Uplerlawna edonna Nantorreria plolli-mneheni pa Nukm ita , de hota emkameni targho'ola Entorna watghudi la rimormiori honona la nohkeran di wawannu ? !
For if the truth of God through my lie abounded to his glory , why am I also still judged as a sinner ? ||| Mere yanpa Yahudi riy dom to ' a e riwra , La'pa ami edon mdenrer lia setia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de nareiniande Uplerlawna yeher to ' pa Nlernan ya'uli-yawedi onnila Enhi ' nana hya ' maka Enakot targa de . Mere hya ' nariei pede Uplerlawna Nto'on reri Yahudi am lia a do ' a-hal mamni ?
Why not as we are slanderously reported , and as some affirm that we say , Let 's do evil , that good may come ? Those who say so are justly condemned . ||| Ine ! La'pa itwaror emkade de emekwalima itakotiwra , Samounu de emkadille , Itsi ' yatyatni-halalli totpena hya ' ed mak kaplola nayamkek memna . Plola pa riy dom de rto'on reri a ' pua e rapolu-raliella a ' u , riwra a ' g ed mak kakot emkade ! Mere riy mak kakot emkare , hota rlernan niukmu la Uplerlawna mak edon kpa'eini-kpahala .
What then ? Are we better than they ? No , in no way . For we previously warned both Jews and Greeks that they are all under sin . ||| Nah ! La'pa emkade de hota la Uplerlawna yamkekni de Yahudi ita tareh dioinia Yahudi atia ' a rena ? Plollolli de hade edonna emkade . A'ukot nohor oleka wa giwra riy Yahudi miy onde Yahudi atia ' a , hononmi de do'omi-halmi nodi plolli la miy mormiormi .
As it is written , There is no one righteous , no , not one . ||| Hade emeknekama ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni riwra , Riy id mana edonna nden rer lia plol wawna .
There is no one who understands . There is no one who seeks after God . ||| Riy id mana edonna nna'erit nana Uplerlawna talanni , ne riy id mana edonna nwak pa nat niohora E ' pa nhu'ru-nhelam la .
They have all turned away . They have together become unprofitable . There is no one who does good , no , not so much as one . ||| Riy honona rhoitio'or doin olek la Uplerlawna . Honona re rler olek la klieratni . Plol toto ' pa riy id mana edonna nhi ' a-nyap miemna plola-mneha .
Their throat is an open tomb . With their tongues they have used deceit . The poison of vipers is under their lips . ||| La'pa raltier die ir lirni re emolmolla hoi-kietra mak kwer reria wawni mak kalgot neka lira-tunu yatyata-halala . Ne putra-palka nwailiola wawni re ralamni . Me nurnu rage ' a yapupu-yaheri emeknekama niy miaka kodi nhienni .
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness . ||| Nurnu re rpenpuen lia nhiorghala-wniaghala , nora yahe ' i-yamali yapolu-yaliella .
Their feet are swift to shed blood . ||| Pleta-plet pa rler la wniunu-wnienna rimormiori .
Destruction and misery are in their ways . ||| Rweyata-rwaniawu me rhi ' a rimormior wialli pa rler la polpuolu-wakwaka lol meni-meni to ' a .
The way of peace , they have n't known . ||| Matni riat la loi-talla mak kod ir pa ror wutga mutwualli re rkalwieda .
There is no fear of God before their eyes . ||| Ne rakleha ya'unni-yamta'ata la Uplerlawna .
Now we know that whatever things the law says , it speaks to those who are under the law , that every mouth may be closed , and all the world may be brought under the judgment of God . ||| Ne , itatga la lira-tunu ri , de e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni pa rakot nohora la riy Yahudi miy maka klernana deulu-tatar de . La ' hade pede riy honona , la'pa Yahudi onde Yahudi atia ' a rakleha nhiapargenni talla pa rakot nohora de irdella plol wawna la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Uplerlawna Net tiarg oleka de rimormiori honona penpuen lia do ' a-hala ralamni .
Because by the works of the law , no flesh will be justified in his sight , for through the law comes the knowledge of sin . ||| Hota riy id mana edonna nlernan talan pa nora Uplerlawna rkalwieda onnila Uplerlawna Netlia de riy de edon nhala , yoma riy de nhi ' a-nyapia haneknek wawannu maka e rakot nohora la agama deullu-tatarni . Mere plollolli de la ' a deulu-tatar maka Uplerlawna Nala mai rimormior ita , de it tat niohor memna it do'oni-halli .
But now apart from the law , a righteousness of God has been revealed , being testified by the law and the prophets , ||| Mere la ' lera-mela ri , de Uplerlawna Ntutg olek talan mai it pa itor owa'ana E ' pa tkalwieda . Ne la talan de , it edonna tlernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni . Mere Musa pukni re , me makwohorulu-ktatrulu pukni re e rakot nohor walia Uplerlawna talanni mak kaplol de .
even the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ to all and on all those who believe . For there is no distinction , ||| De hota Uplerlawna talanni de totpena rimormiori rora Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana , hornama rimormiori rpesiaya Yesus Kristus . Uplerlawna hihi'ini de la ' a rimormiori honona ramneneh momuou , edonna la ' a wniarorni to ' a-taiya .
for all have sinned , and fall short of the glory of God , ||| Yoma riy honona rler olek la do ' a-hala ralamni , me nhiolli re oliet meman la Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni nhiolli-lietni mak kmou-kwitna .
being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus , ||| Pede Uplerlawna sniayanni de it edonna twahla nana mere Nal to ' a la rimormiori ita totpa tor E ' pa tkalwied owa'ana . Yala'ani de emkadilla , Rimormiori rler la yamori-yalewna la ' a Kristus Yesus mak ktuw niana-nhai nian ita .
whom God sent to be an atoning sacrifice through faith in his blood , for a demonstration of his righteousness through the passing over of prior sins , in God 's forbearance , ||| De Uplerlawna Nala Yesus totpa Nhuria rarni pa Nler la matmiati ralamni emeka hopopa-hegeuru hoihoi-tantiani persembahan maka ktuw niana-khai nian ita , totpena la ' hade pede rimormiori nawnie'er doin olek la do ' a-hala , hornama ta tsa'ar to ' it aranni la E ' mak kmat lia it rerieini . Uplerlawna Nhi ' emkade totpena Ntutga E plolli-mneheni la yaweratni-yatailli nawerta-natailla plol wawna . Yoma la ' a ler ululu Uplerlawna Nod niohora do ' a-hala maka rimormior ha rhi ' a re . E ' edonna Nukum ma'ta ira .
to demonstrate his righteousness at this present time , that he might himself be just and the justifier of him who has faith in Jesus . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de la ' a Yesus matmiatni de Ntutga hankeranni-ralmha'arni la do ' a-hala , totpena Ntutga plolli-mneheni la yaweratni-yatailli , yoma edon Nhoratdoin rira do'oni-halli . Ne la ' a Yesus matmiatni itamkek meman walia de Enodi plolli pa Netlia hameni mak kpesiay Yesus de pa hota ror E ' pa rkalwied owa'ana .
Where then is the boasting ? It is excluded . By what kind of law ? Of works ? No , but by a law of faith . ||| La ' hade pede itakleh memna nhiapargen pia tatulu-tapetan la it hihi'ini-yapyapni yoma itwaror it hihi'ini-yapyapni re nod it pa tor owa'an Uplerlawna tkalwieda . La ' hya ' pede emkadeno ? Ina-nara ama hyali , hade emkade yoma itler pa tor owa'ana Uplerlawna tkalwieda hornama itpesiaya Yesus Kristus . It edonna tora Uplerlawna tkalwied owa'ana onnila tlernohora hya ' maka e rhorat targa la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni .
We maintain therefore that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the law . ||| Yoma la'pa riy maka itiwra kor oleka Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana , de edon riwra yoma enlernohor oleka hya ' ed maka ha rhorat targa la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni , mere yoma la ' pesiayni la Yesus Kristus .
Or is God the God of Jews only ? Is n't he the God of Gentiles also ? Yes , of Gentiles also , ||| Yahudi miy yana mpiarora de Uplerlawan de Yahudi rmeh ' a Uplerlawanni ? Miat niohora de Uplerlawan de Yahudi atia ' a Uplerlawanni walia hade toh ! Yowa , plola pa Yahudi atia ' a mana Uplerlawanni E ' a .
since indeed there is one God who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through faith . ||| Miat niohora hade yoma Uplerlawan de Ha Nmeh ' a to ' a . Ne Uplerlawan de ed maka khi ' pede , riy Yahudi ror owa'ana E ' pa rkalwieda , yoma la ' pesiayni re . Maka Yahudi atia ' a mana , Enhi ' pa ror owa'an E ' a pa rkalwieda owa'ana , hade ho'mana yoma la ' a pesiayni .
Do we then nullify the law through faith ? May it never be ! No , we establish the law . ||| Yanpa miy miwra hadi nnia'eratni de yoma itpesiay oleka Yesus Kristus pede itsopliala agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni ? ! Hota edon emkade ! Mere plollolli de la ' a it pesiayni de nariei pede twayow nohor walia deulu-tatar de .
What then will we say that Abraham , our forefather , has found according to the flesh ? ||| Ina-nara ama hyali , itat niohor memna it pesiayni yala'ani la ' a Abraham , makden Yahudi upni-tgarni mak kala ' ul memn ita . Mpiaror tek la ! La ' talan emkameni pede Abraham nler wut lia riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni onnila Uplerlawna Netlia e edon nhala ?
For if Abraham was justified by works , he has something to boast about , but not toward God . ||| Abraham edon nlernan wniatikilgen pia enwarehi e inonni la Uplerlawna yoma Abraham hihi'ini atia ' a ed mak karei pia Uplerlawna Nreinian e ' a .
For what does the Scripture say ? Abraham believed God , and it was accounted to him for righteousness . ||| Yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e riwra , Abraham npesiay Uplerlawna , ne la ' pesiayni de pede Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana e ' pa emeka riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Now to him who works , the reward is not counted as grace , but as something owed . ||| La'pa riy mak kari , hota rlernan kaini , de kaini de edonna emekneka hya ' maka ha ral to ' a , mere kaini de kniarni wniahlani .
But to him who does n't work , but believes in him who justifies the ungodly , his faith is accounted for righteousness . ||| Mere la'pa itakot nohora rimormiori rora Uplerlawna de hota emkadi , La'pa riy dom de edonna rahnia'ar la ira hihi'ini-yapyap wamueheni pa nodia yamori-yalewna , mere rpesiay to ' a Uplerlawna , yoma E ' ed maka ketlia mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala pa rwal lia mak kaplol la E yamkekni onnila pesiay die , hota Uplerlawna Nreinian ira . Mere Uplerlawna edonna Nreinian ira onnila e rhi ' a-ryapia hya ' ed mak kaplola .
Even as David also pronounces blessing on the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works , ||| Emkade walia ray Daud nakot nohora la ' a riy maka kahepru yoma Uplerlawna orgahani Na ' nan oleka riy di pa emeka riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni , de edonna namkek la riy de hihi'ini-yapyapni . Daud niwra ,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven , whose sins are covered . ||| Unut lawna la riy maka Uplerlawna Nhap dioinia do'oni-halli pa Nhoratdoin oleka .
Blessed is the man whom the Lord will by no means charge with sin . ||| Unut lawna la ' a riy maka Uplerlawna edonna Natian la ' a-natian mai do'oni-halli .
Is this blessing then pronounced only on the circumcised , or on the uncircumcised also ? For we say that faith was accounted to Abraham for righteousness . ||| Lir mak kiwra unut lawan de , e rakot to ' hadella ' Yahudi maka ha rsunat nan to ' a ? Onde lir de e rakot walia hadella Yahudi atia ' a mak edonna klernohora sunat ? Mpiaror tek la wniahaurnu di , de onnila Abraham pesiayni la Uplerlawna pede Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana e pa emeka riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
How then was it counted ? When he was in circumcision , or in uncircumcision ? Not in circumcision , but in uncircumcision . ||| Ne la ' ler meni ed maka Uplerlawna Netlia pa Nreiniana Abrahama ? La ' ler maka Abraham edonna rsunat ma'ta onde rsunt oleka wa ? Plola , la ler de maka Uplerlawna Nreiniana Abraham de edonna rsunat ma'ta e ' a toh !
He received the sign of circumcision , a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had while he was in uncircumcision , that he might be the father of all those who believe , though they might be in uncircumcision , that righteousness might also be accounted to them . ||| Uplerlawna Nreiniana Abrahama onnila pesiayni , nhorwua na'nama rsunat e ' a . Ne sunat de emeknekama kniau ida mak ktutga , de e ' de mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , yoma pesiayni la Uplerlawna . Ne Uplerlawna Nreinian meman e ' de la ' lera e ' edonna nlernohor ma'ta deulu-tatra sunat . Pede hota Abraham nhi ' am la Yahudi atia ' honona maka kler wut lia Uplerlawna mutnu , mak Enetlia de ror E rkalwied owa'ana yoma irpesiaya Uplerlawna kennama ir edonna rlernohor ma'ta sunat deullu-tatarni .
He is the father of circumcision to those who not only are of the circumcision , but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham , which he had in uncircumcision . ||| Abraham nla ' walia am la Yahudi maka klernohora deulu-tatra sunat hornama ir mana rlernohora ir upni-tgarni Abraham pa rpesiay Uplerlawna . Rpesiay Uplerlawna pa emekwali Abraham pesiayni la ' ler maka e ' edonna nlernan ma'ta deulu-tatra sunat .
For the promise to Abraham and to his offspring that he would be heir of the world was n't through the law , but through the righteousness of faith . ||| Uplerlawna nnio'oni la ' a Abraham nora duratni-waitni niwra , Hota nohkeran di de Abraham o gahamu . Uplerlawna edonna Nano ' emkade yoma Abraham nlernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni , mere onnila Abraham npesiay Uplerlawna . Ne la ' Abraham pesiayni de pede Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana Abraham , emekwali riy mak kaplol oleka la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
For if those who are of the law are heirs , faith is made void , and the promise is made of no effect . ||| Yoma la'pa Yahudi re rlernana hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru onnila rlernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni , de hota pesiayni la Uplerlawna nakleh et miemna perkuna . Ne hota nnio'oni de mana nwal lia hamamuamua yoma hota ir edonna rlernan walia .
For the law produces wrath , for where there is no law , neither is there disobedience . ||| Yoma rimormiori honona rpera-rdait neka agama deullu-tatarni . Ne hota pniera-dniaiti la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni ed mak kod riy lia Uplerlawna niukum lawanni . La'pa deulu-tatra hadamonan de pniera-dniaitia mana hadamonan wali .
For this cause it is of faith , that it may be according to grace , to the end that the promise may be sure to all the offspring , not to that only which is of the law , but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham , who is the father of us all . ||| La ' rimormiori pesiayni la Uplerlawna pede hota irlernana hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nakot targ oleka la ira , totpena Uplerlawna Nal nnio'oni de la makpesiay re honona onnila E ralam kalwiedni Nmeh ' a to ' a . Ne edonna Ntot nan to ' a Yahudi makpesiay maka klernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni , mere Nal wal lia Yahudi atia ' maka kpesiaya Uplerlawna , pa emekwalima la ' a Abraham pesiayni la E ' a . Yoma Abraham ed mak khi ' a am la rimormiori it hononita maka kpesiay .
As it is written , I have made you a father of many nations . This is in the presence of him whom he believed , God , who gives life to the dead , and calls the things that are not , as though they were . ||| Yoma hota emekwalima Uplerlawna lirni la Abraham , Abraham , Aghi ' oleka o ' pa omhi ' am la hairi liawanni . Abraham npesiaya de la emkameni ho'mana hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' hya ' ed mak Ha Nano'taru oleka de . Yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kodi plolli pa Namoria riy mak kmati-kmolu me Uplerlawna maka kakota pa hya ' mak edonna kdena mana hota rdena .
Against hope , Abraham in hope believed , to the end that he might become a father of many nations , according to that which had been spoken , So will your offspring be . ||| Abraham nha'ar to ' a mormiorni la Uplerlawna , me pesiayni nden rer lia Uplerlawna pa edonna nwaler nan kuku ' a , kennama hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa de emeka ta'enia ha rhi ' nana . Hade pede Abraham nla ' am la hairi-hairi , pa hota emekwalima e rhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni la Abraham la ' Puka ralamni , de e riwra , Hota o duratmu-waitmu riy harahu .
Without being weakened in faith , he did n't consider his own body , already having been worn out , he being about a hundred years old , and the deadness of Sarah 's womb . ||| La ' ler de de Abraham natga de hota enakleh a'na wa , yoma tuwnu nhamto'owa . Mormiorni nla ' nan oleka anni nhi ' pa la'awa rahu ida . Ne hawni Sara mana nkern pa nakleh a'na . Mere emkade ho'mana pesiayni de naruri-na'orta .
Yet , looking to the promise of God , he did n't waver through unbelief , but grew strong through faith , giving glory to God , ||| Entoran rer pitpitga pesiayni de la ' a hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nakot de . Yeher to'ama pesiayni naruri me enodia ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna .
and being fully assured that what he had promised , he was also able to perform . ||| Enpesiay mieman de hota Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa Nhi ' nana hya ' ed maka Ha Nakota .
Therefore it also was credited to him for righteousness . ||| La hade pede ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni , Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana Abraham pa emeka riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni .
Now it was not written that it was accounted to him for his sake alone , ||| Me lira-tunu maka ha rhorat targa ri , de edonna rtot nan to ' a Abraham nmeh ' a ,
but for our sake also , to whom it will be accounted , who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead , ||| mere la ' it wali . It mana , hota Uplerlawna Nreinian wali ita emekwalima riy maka kaplol la E yamkekni , yoma it pesiayni la Uplerlawna maka kamori-kalewan nana Yesus , Itmatromlawanni de la ' a matmiatni ralamni .
who was delivered up for our trespasses , and was raised for our justification . ||| Yesus de , rala olek hade pa totpena rwenna yoma la ' a it do'oni-halli rerieini . Mere Uplerlawna ed mak kamori-kalewn owa'ana totpena Nahak owa'ana talan pa itora Uplerlawna tkalwieda .
Being therefore justified by faith , we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ , ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , onnila it pesiayni la Yesus Kristus pede itor olek Uplerlawna tkalwied owa'ana . Ne la ' hade pede hota itora E ' a tmor wiut lia mtiertierannu onnila Yesus Kristus , Itmatromlawanni hihi'ini de mai ita .
through whom we also have our access by faith into this grace in which we stand . We rejoice in hope of the glory of God . ||| La ' a Yesus hihi'ini pede la ' lera-mela ri , de itlernan oleka talla pliora pa Uplerlawna Ntutga E ralam kalwiedni mai ita onnila it pesiayni . Me ita tahepuepur wali yoma itsa'ar it ralamni de hota la ' ler mak kmai die , de itre'ela tlernana Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni me ya'ulli-yawedni !
Not only this , but we also rejoice in our sufferings , knowing that suffering produces perseverance , ||| Ne hade edonna nmeh ' a mere hota tamuki-tahepur nohor lol walia it luini-nuhranu , yoma itatg oleka de , hota la ' a lui-nuhru de pa yeher to ' a itatu tatehra it ralamni la kropna-krieutu polpuol ina-wakwak ama .
and perseverance , proven character , and proven character , hope , ||| Ne hota la ' a itatu tatehra it ralamni di , de it tden rer lia plol wawna la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Ne la'pa it nhiolli mak emkade , hade ed maka kod it pa tsa'ar it aranni la Uplerlawna de hota Enhi ' nana hya ' maka Ha Nakot targ oleka wa .
and hope does n't disappoint us , because God 's love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us . ||| Ne nhia'ar aran gen die mak itsa'ar tar it aranni hamamuamua atia ' hade . Yoma hota plola pa Uplerlawna Nala hare honona maka Ha Nano'targa . Itat niohora hade yoma Uplerlawna Nal oleka sniayanni namniota it ihranu ralamni . Uplerlawna Nhi ' hare , de Nala E Nhiw Lululli pa Ndella it ihranu ralamni .
For while we were yet weak , at the right time Christ died for the ungodly . ||| Uplerlawna Ntutga E ralam kalwiedni mai ita yoma la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nwalir targ oleka de , de la ' ler maka itakleha ruri-lai onnila do ' a-hala nutni-ndahl ita , de Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a Nmati , yoma la ' it mak kahmena katlina-katailla E ' a de rerieini .
For one will hardly die for a righteous man . Yet perhaps for a good person someone would even dare to die . ||| Nhi'inde la'pa ntut niana riy maka kmor lia yatlina-yatailia deulu-tatra id ho'mana riy rahmena rod niana pa rmat lia e wawannu . Mere la'pa nlernan riy mak nhi'inde ktutga ralam kalwied la rimormior wialli de matialo'onama riy rmat lia wawannu .
But God commends his own love toward us , in that while we were yet sinners , Christ died for us . ||| Mere Uplerlawna hihi'ini narehelia hade , yoma la ' ler maka itden meman ma'ta la do ' a-hala ralamni , de Uplerlawna Ntutga sniayanni la ita , la ' a Yesus Kristus Nmat lia it rerieini .
Much more then , being now justified by his blood , we will be saved from God 's wrath through him . ||| Ina-nara ama hyali , itor owa'ana Uplerlawna tkalwieda yoma la ' a Yesus Kristus Nhuria rarni pa Nmat lia it rerieini . Ne la ' a itat niohor Enhi ' emkade mai ita , de yeher to ' pa itat niohora de hota Enamori-nalewn it la Uplerlawna hankeranni-ralmha'arni mak hota ktuin la nohkerna .
For if while we were enemies , we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son , much more , being reconciled , we will be saved by his life . ||| La ' lera Uplerlawna Nahankeran la it de , E ' ed maka kalwied nan ita onnila A'nani Nler la matmiati . Yaho'ma la ' lera-mela ri de maka itor oleka E ' pa tkalwied wa ? ! Hota yeher to ' a pa ramori-ralewn it la ' a Uplerlawna hankeranni-ralmha'arni onnila A'nani Nmormiori owa'ana toh !
Not only so , but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ , through whom we have now received the reconciliation . ||| Ne hota ita'uli-tawed niohora Uplerlawna onnila E kalwiedni maka Ha Ntutga mai ita onnila Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus . Yoma la ' a Yesus Kristus de , pede la dodo'ondi de Enod miemn it pa itora Uplerlawna tkalwieda .
Therefore , as sin entered into the world through one man , and death through sin , so death passed to all men because all sinned . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , twaror tek la hare honona nnia'eratni . Do ' a-hala nler la nohkerna wawannu de onnila Adam , riy memeh ' a de , do'oni-halli . Ne la ' do'oni-halli de , pede matmiati mana nhar wiali . Narieiniande matmiat die nwewar nan rimormiori honona , yoma rimormiori honona rler olek la do ' a-hala .
For until the law , sin was in the world , but sin is not charged when there is no law . ||| Deulu-tatra agama Yahudi edonna ral ma'ta , de do ' a-hala ed olek la mai nohkeran di wawannu . Mere edonna rwaghal ma'ta rimormiori re do'oni-halli yoma deulu-tatra hadamonan ma'ta .
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses , even over those whose sins were n't like Adam 's disobedience , who is a foreshadowing of him who was to come . ||| Mere la ' Adam lerni meman pa nmai lia Musa lerni , de matmiati-molmuolu nlola tipru-warta ra ' i-tranna , de rimormiori honona rmati . La'pa riy maka edonna khi ' a do ' a-hala maka Adam nhi ' nan de de , ir mana rler walia riwtu-hora matmiati-molmuolu ralamni la ' a do ' a-hala rerieini . Hota la ' a Adam de hihi'ini pede rimormiori honona rlernana wniahlani . Emkade wal lia la Yesus Kristus mak ktawli'ir de , hota la ' E hihi'ini pede rimormiori honona rlernana wniahlani .
But the free gift is n't like the trespass . For if by the trespass of the one the many died , much more did the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man , Jesus Christ , abound to the many . ||| Mere irora hihi'ini de edon ramneha . Yoma mak Uplerlawna Nala de nareh miemna hya ' maka Adam npera-ndaitia . La ' Adam de , riy ida nmeh ' a de , mere la ' pnierni-dniayatni tonekwane riy honona rler la matmiati . Mere hota la Yesus Kristus de , de riy ida nmeh ' a wali E ' a , mere la ' E ralam kalwiedni mai ita pede hota Uplerlawna Nhuri-ntowria sniayanni la riy harahu me Nal ir pa ror E ' a rkalwied owa'ana .
The gift is not as through one who sinned , for the judgment came by one to condemnation , but the free gift followed many trespasses to justification . ||| Wniahla maka Uplerlawna Nala la rimormiori re , onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini de , ematia ' a wniahla maka rimormiori ha rlernana la ' a maka Adam ha nhi ' nan de . Yoma la'pa Adam de pnierni-dniayatni nhorwua , de wniahlani de , ha retlia rimormiori do'oni-halli pa rukmua tniu'tu la ' a mei wawannu . Mere la emkameni ho'mana la riy honona rhi ' do ' a-ryap hiala , mere Uplerlawna Nwahla la ira , de Nala ir pa ror E ' a rkalwied owa'ana yoma Enetlia de ir raplol olek la E yamkekni .
For if by the trespass of the one , death reigned through the one , so much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one , Jesus Christ . ||| La emkameni mana Adam de riy ida nmeh ' a to ' a mere la ' a pnierni-dniayatni tonekwane matmiati-molmuolu nwewar la meni-meni to ' a . Mere itat memna la ' a Yesus Kristus hihi'ini , pede riy maka Uplerlawna Ntutga ralam kalwiedni mak kareh mieman de totpa ror E ' a rkalwied wa de , hota rmormiori-rdardiar pia nodi liarni la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha me rora Uplerlawna pa rodi plolli-rtaryatnu .
So then as through one trespass , all men were condemned , even so through one act of righteousness , all men were justified to life . ||| Pede emeknekama Adam pnierni-dniayatni la ' raralamni to ' a , mere narieiniande rimormioria nohkerna wawannu rlernana niukmu , hota emkade walia la ' a Yesus Kristus hihi'ini id to ' a , maka Nlernohor Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , de nreiniande riy honona rlernan talla pa iror E ' rkalwieda ne irlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa mak kodi liarni .
For as through the one man 's disobedience many were made sinners , even so through the obedience of the one , many will be made righteous . ||| Ne emekwalima la'pa riy honona rler la do ' a-hala ralamni la ' Adam nmeh ' a maka kakleha ya'unni-yamta'ata . Emkade walia la ' riy honona makpesiay mana hota ror owa'ana Uplerlawna rkalwieda , onnila Yesus de Nmeh ' a yatlinni-yatailli la ' a Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
The law came in that the trespass might abound , but where sin abounded , grace abounded more exceedingly , ||| Rala agama deullu-tatarni de totpena yeher to ' pa rimormiori rat niohor memna ir rhi ' oleka do ' a-hala . Mere la'pa yeher to'ola rimormiori rhi ' do ' a-ryap hala , de Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni nareh niana do ' a-hala .
that as sin reigned in death , even so grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord . ||| La ululu de la'pa rimormiori rhi ' do ' a-hala de hota rler la matmiati ralamni mere dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Ntutga tniulanni-sniayanni pede Enal talan pa itor owa'an E ' pa tkalwieda . Hota la ' hade pede itler la mormiori pa nodi liarni onnila Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus hihi'ini de mai ita .
What shall we say then ? Shall we continue in sin , that grace may abound ? ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yanpa hota riy ida nwarora niwra , Hota la'pa plola pa Uplerlawna Ntutga ralam kalwiedni la mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala , de hota samounu de itsi ' neka do ' a-hala pa nodi liarni totpena hota yeher to ' a pa Uplerlawna Nsayn reri ita .
May it never be ! We who died to sin , how could we live in it any longer ? ||| Hota edon emkade ! Yoma do ' a-hala edonna nodi plolli owa'an la mai ita . Pede la'pa emkade , hota emkameni pa itsi ' rereri owa'ana do ' a-hala ? !
Or do n't you know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death ? ||| Mhioratreria , la ' a lera rharani ita totpena itor Kristus Yesus tla ' ihru ida-ralm ida , de e rhi ' hade totpena emeknekama rwatiehra wut it tora Kristus la matmiatni .
We were buried therefore with him through baptism into death , that just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father , so we also might walk in newness of life . ||| Pede nhiaran die , de emeknekama rhuwur wutg it la Kristus . Totpena hota emeknekama Kristus Nmori owa'an la ' E Amni plolli-mneheni maka khitita-kreprepra , hota it di de emekwali E ' a , pa itler la mormiori warwuaru mak ematia ' ululu de .
For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death , we will also be part of his resurrection , ||| Pede itora Kristus tler olek la id wa , yoma emeknekama itmat niohora E ' a . Pa hota naplol meman walia de hota itler la ida yoma itler la mormiori warwuaru emekwali E ' a .
knowing this , that our old man was crucified with him , that the body of sin might be done away with , so that we would no longer be in bondage to sin . ||| Itatg oleka de ita yehwani rimormiorni la ululu geni ha rwen nan olek wutg la Kristus la ' a auwlakra hananni totpena it edon tlernohora owa'ana it yehwa rimormiorni mak kod it la do ' a-hala . La ' talan mak emkade pede do ' a-hala mana edonna nodia plolli owa'an mai ita .
For he who has died has been freed from sin . ||| Yoma it di de emolmolan nekama riy ida mak kmati , pa rolin doinia la do ' a-hala ralamni .
But if we died with Christ , we believe that we will also live with him , ||| It tmat niohora Kristus de , de itpesiay wiali de hota itora E pa tmori-tlewan rewre'wa .
knowing that Christ , being raised from the dead , dies no more . Death no longer has dominion over him ! ||| Itpesiay hade yoma itat niohora de Kristus mana Uplerlawna Nalewn oleka la matmiatni ralamni , pa hota edonna Nmati owa'ana . Matmiati hota edonna nodi olek plolli la E wa .
For the death that he died , he died to sin one time , but the life that he lives , he lives to God . ||| Kristus Nmat lia do ' a-hala wawannu totpena matmiatni de nala do ' a-hala la yawa . Nmat raralamni to ' a , edon Nmati owa'ana . Ne Nmormiori owa'an de totpena nodi ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna .
Thus consider yourselves also to be dead to sin , but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord . ||| Hota emkade walia , ina-nara ama-hyali , hota miatu mpiaror nohor inon wamuehemi de pa emeka riy maka do ' a-hala edon nodi plolli owa'an la , mak kor oleka Kristus Yesus rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida pede la ' a mormiormi ralamni de miodia ya'uli-yawedia la Uplerlawna .
Therefore do n't let sin reign in your mortal body , that you should obey it in its lusts . ||| Pede yan memmemna miolin doinia do ' a-hala pa nodi plolli la miy inonmi mak hota kmat die . Yana do ' a-hala nodi plolli la miy pia hota mliernohora ralma-riora yatyatmi re .
Also , do not present your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness , but present yourselves to God as alive from the dead , and your members as instruments of righteousness to God . ||| Yana mhiuria limmi-lakmi , tutu'umi-niernieranmi la'pa miy inonmi tetema totpa do ' a-hala nodi plolli pa nnairia na nhi ' a-nyapi yatyatni-halalli . Mere mial inonmi la Uplerlawna pa emeknekama miy mmiati oleka pa rwatitni olek miy lia mormiori ralamni . Mial inonmi tetema pa mlier wut lia Uplerlawna totpena Nnair miy pia mhi ' a-myapia hya ' mak kaplol la E yamkekni .
For sin will not have dominion over you , for you are not under law , but under grace . ||| Hota mhi ' emkade yoma do ' a-hala edon nodi olek plolli owa'an tiy miy , yoma miy edonna mliernohora owa'ana agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni totpa mior Uplerlawna mkialwied owa'ana . Mere Uplerlawna ed mak kodi plolli tiy miy . La ' a E ralam kalwiedni pede Ntulan la tiy miy totpena miy edon mhi ' owa'ana do ' a-hala .
What then ? Shall we sin because we are not under law but under grace ? May it never be ! ||| Yanpa hota riy ida nwahla a li'ru niwra , La'pa it edon tlernohor owa'an Yahudi deullu-tatarni , mere Uplerlawna Ntulla-nsayn ma'ta ita onnila E ralam kalwiedni de , hota emeknekama Uplerlawna Nhur niohora it pa itsi ' a do ' a-hala ? Hota awuahla lir de . Yan memmemna itsi ' emkade !
Do n't you know that when you present yourselves as servants and obey someone , you are the servants of whomever you obey , whether of sin to death , or of obedience to righteousness ? ||| Totpena miatga , la'pa miy mpiak la riy id pa mkiar lia , de mitlina-mitailla riy de , yoma miy mlia ' oleka hopopna la e wa . Emkade walia la do ' a-hala me tlina-taili la Uplerlawna . La'pa miala inonmi pa mhi ' do ' a-myap hiala , de hota do ' a-hala ed mak kodi plolli tiy miy . Ne hota hade ed mak kodi miy lia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . Mere la'pa mial inonmi la Uplerlawna pa mitlina-mitailla de hota emeknekama hya ' ed mak kaplollola nodi plolli tiy miy pia miy mmiormior lola plollol wawannu .
But thanks be to God that , whereas you were bondservants of sin , you became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching to which you were delivered . ||| Mere ta'uli-tawedia Uplerlawna , yoma la ululu de do ' a-hala nodi plolli tiy miy , mere dodo'ondi miy miala ralammi tetema pa mitlina-mitailla wniatutu-wniaye ' a plollola maka ha rakot nohor olek tiy miy wia .
Being made free from sin , you became bondservants of righteousness . ||| Miy di er maka Uplerlawna Nwe'er doin la do ' a-hala , me la ' dodo'ondi de miy e mlia ' riy maka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la pa miy mdien rer lia plol wawannu .
I speak in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh , for as you presented your members as servants to uncleanness and to wickedness upon wickedness , even so now present your members as servants to righteousness for sanctification . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , onnila miy ralma-riormi la ' a Uplerlawna yala'ani de emeka lokmera-papay ma'ta miy , pede agala lira yawalliohor di la ' a hopopna-lili'iru totpena plet pa miy mnia'erit nana lir de wniahaurnu . Ululu de mial inonmi pa emeknekama miy e mhi ' a ata-wa'ara la ' a do ' a-hala nareiniande hota yeher to ' pa yatyatni-halalli maka kakdeha-kaktiahli na'ititar rer lia . Emkade walia la dodo'ondi de hota miatu mial inonmi pa mhi ' hopopan la Uplerlawna totpena miy mhi ' mak kaplol la E yamkekni totpena la mormiormi de mlia ' E kamieheni maka kakleha do ' a-hala .
For when you were servants of sin , you were free from righteousness . ||| Lera mitlin ma'ta la do ' a-hala , de hya ' mak kaplola edon nodi plolli ma'ta tiy miy .
What fruit then did you have at that time in the things of which you are now ashamed ? For the end of those things is death . ||| La ' ler de de hya ' untia ed maka ha mliernana la do ' a-hal maka khi ' amola-ma ' miy ? Hadamonna toh ! ? Yoma hihi ' a-yapyapi re er mak kod riy lia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
But now , being made free from sin and having become servants of God , you have your fruit of sanctification and the result of eternal life . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Nwe'er doin miy pia do ' a-hala edon nodi plolli owa'an tiy miy , me mlia ' oleka hopopan la Uplerlawna . Ne unut lawan maka ha mliernan de , totpena mpial lia Uplerlawna mutnu mak kakleha do ' a-hala . Pede hota mlier la mormiori plalahwa mak kodi liarni .
For the wages of sin is death , but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord . ||| Yoma do ' a-hala wniahlani de matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . Mere Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napal niana mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni la riy mak kor wutga Kristus Yesus , Itmatromlawanni tla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
Or do n't you know , brothers for I speak to men who know the law , that the law has dominion over a man for as long as he lives ? ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , aghorta hadi tiy miy mak kat niohor oleka deulu-tatra . Pede miy miat memn oleka de la'pa riy ida nmormior mia'ta de riy de natlina-natailla deulu-tatra . Nmat wia nampena edon natlin owa'an la deulu-tatar de toh !
For the woman that has a husband is bound by law to the husband while he lives , but if the husband dies , she is discharged from the law of the husband . ||| Mimpiaror teka ! La ' a deulu-tatra ralamni de e riwra , Patke ' maka kmehlim olek wa de , la'pa hawni nmormior mia'ta , de patke ' de e nawniatiehra ma'ta la mehlimni . Hawni nmat wia nampena patke'eni edon nawniatiehr olekwa . Emkade pede pat de nolin lim oleka la deulu-tatra mehlima .
So then if , while the husband lives , she is joined to another man , she would be called an adulteress . But if the husband dies , she is free from the law , so that she is no adulteress , though she is joined to another man . ||| Mere la'pa hawni muanke ' a e nmormior mia'ta mere patke'eni nora muanke ' a dom to ' a , de patke ' de rweta la mak kalira-kaliai . Mere la'pa hawni muanke ' de nmati olekwa , de deulu-tatra mehlima hadamonna olek la patke ' de wa . Ne la'pa e nmehlim owa'an pa nora muanke ' a dom to ' a ho'mana , yaliai atia ' a de .
Therefore , my brothers , you also were made dead to the law through the body of Christ , that you would be joined to another , to him who was raised from the dead , that we might produce fruit to God . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , hade emkade wali mai ita . It edon tawniatiehra wut olek walia la deulu-tatra . Yoma emeknekama yehwa rimormiori ululu rwatiehra wutga la ' Yesus Kristus la auwlakra hananni pa itmati niohora . Pede la ' lera-mela ri de deulu-tatra edon nodi plolli olek la ita . Mere hota E ' de maka ha ralewan nana la matmiati ralamni , gahani olek it wa totpena itla ' walia riy mak khi ' a-kyapia mak kalwiedwedni pa ta'uli-tawedi Uplerlawna la ' a it mormiorni di .
For when we were in the flesh , the sinful passions which were through the law worked in our members to bring out fruit to death . ||| Yoma ululu de itmormior die tlernohor to ' a it yehwa rimormiori . Ne la'pa itat niohora deulu-tatra agama , de it ralamni yeher to ' pa nwarora yatyatni mak ka'hira ita ralma-riorni pa nod it la do ' a-hala mak hota kod matmiatni plalahwa mai ita .
But now we have been discharged from the law , having died to that in which we were held , so that we serve in newness of the spirit , and not in oldness of the letter . ||| Mere la ' dodo'ondi de rwe'er doin olek it la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni . Yoma emeknekama itmati olek wa pede ita edon tawniatiehr olek la deulu-tatra . Pede la dodo'ondi meman pa itatu tsima-tre ' a Uplerlawna . Mere it edonna tsima-tre ' a Uplerlawna la ' a tatlina-tatail nohora deulu-tatra agama pa emeka la ' ler ululu de . Mere itlernohor oleka talan warwuaru pa tsima-tre ' a E ' a , onnila Uplerlawna Nhiwni rurni-laini himimni-rere'eni mai ita .
What shall we say then ? Is the law sin ? May it never be ! However , I would n't have known sin except through the law . For I would n't have known coveting unless the law had said , You shall not covet . ||| La'pa hade emkade , yana itwarora tiwra yanpa deulu-tatra de ha yatyata de onnila narieiniande riy do'oni-halli na'ititar rer lia . Mere agatga de hota edon emkade . Yoma mimkek nek la deulu-tatra yala'ani la a mormio'ru lera-lera . Deulu-tatar de ha yatyat atia ' a , mere hade ed maka kwatutu-kwaye ' a pua agatu wuarora-wualai niohora do ' a-hala yala'ani . Yoma a ' g e uplin niohora la'pa a ralmu e nala rira hyonni-hyanni de hade edon naplola , mere la ' a agama deullu-tatarni niwra , Yan memmemna ralammi e nala riy hyonni-hyanni , na'nama agat niohora hade nhala .
But sin , finding occasion through the commandment , produced in me all kinds of coveting . For apart from the law , sin is dead . ||| La ' a agama deullu-tatarni pede do ' a-hala nlernan talan pa nwalia a nhiortu pa hota awuaror nan nek la riy hyonni-hyanni pa hota yeher to ' pa a ralmu nal nana hare . Mere la'pa agama deullu-tatarni hadamonna de hota do ' a-hala nakleha talla pa nodi plolli mai ita .
I was alive apart from the law once , but when the commandment came , sin revived and I died . ||| La ' ululu amormior die a ' g e uplin niohor ma'ta agama deullu-tatarni pede a ' g edon wuaror nohora a do ' u-ha'lu . Mere la'pa deulu-tatra agama nhar wia dewade emeknekamde a ih'ru-ralmu nahmuakru pa nwarora do ' a-hala la a mormio'ru . Do ' a-hala re rnutni-rdahl a ' u
The commandment which was for life , this I found to be for death , ||| pede hota alier la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . Pede na'nama agat niohora de Uplerlawna Nala deulu-tatra pa nodi mormiori-dardiari mere rwaldioinia de deulu-tatar de hota nodi a lia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
for sin , finding occasion through the commandment , deceived me , and through it killed me . ||| La ' a agama deullu-tatarni pede do ' a-hala nlernan talan pa nod a lia putra-palka yoma awuarora de la ' a agama deullu-tatarni yala'ani pede aliernana yamori-yalewna , mere plollolli de hota do ' a-hala nod a lia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
Therefore the law indeed is holy , and the commandment holy , righteous , and good . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , agama deullu-tatarni de ha yatyat atia ' hade , mere ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna me hya ' ed maka deulu-tatar de nakota , de ha rwatiawua Uplerlawna pede naplola me kalwieda .
Did then that which is good become death to me ? May it never be ! But sin , that it might be shown to be sin , was producing death in me through that which is good , that through the commandment sin might become exceedingly sinful . ||| Mere yanpa mimpiarora deulu-tatra samomuou de hota ed mak kodi a lia matmiati-molmuol plalahwa de . Mere agatga edon emkade ! Yoma hya ' mak kodi a pua alier la do ' a-hala ralamni , de a ralma-rior wamueh ' u mak kwaror reria do ' a-hala . Yoma la'pa utlin nana deulu-tatra agama mak kalwiedwed de , yeher to ' pa a ih'ru-ralmu ed mak kod rer a lia do ' a-hala ralamni mak kodi matmiati-molmuolu . La ' hade emkade totpena tamkek memna a hihi ' u-yapya'pu de do ' a-hala toto ' a hade , me totpena do ' a-hala de yatyatni-halalli nayamkek memna onnila ta'en niana aliernohora deulu-tatra .
For we know that the law is spiritual , but I am fleshly , sold under sin . ||| Itat niohora de agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni de ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , mere a ' di de rimormior miaka kakleh ruri-lai id memna a ' pua ta'en niana aghi ' hya ' mak kaplola . Hota emeknekama rtekua riy id pa nhi ' a hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara , emkade walia de do ' a-hala nodi plolli mai a ' u .
For I do n't understand what I am doing . For I do n't practice what I desire to do , but what I hate , that I do . ||| Amueh ' a nek de uplin niohora hya ' nariei pede aghi ' emkarena . Yoma hya ' ed mak kaplola maka a ralma-rio'ru niwra nhi ' a , de edonna ghi ' nana , mere do ' a-hala maka a ralmu edonna nal nana demade aghi ' nana .
But if what I do n't desire , that I do , I consent to the law that it is good . ||| Ne la'pa aliernohora a ralma-rior wamueh ' u mere narieiniande a ralmu nmawla , de hade ed mak ktutga de a ' g e wuayow nohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni .
So now it is no more I that do it , but sin which dwells in me . ||| La ' hade de a ' g edonna liernohora hya ' maka a ralmu ha nala pa aghi ' nana de , mere onnila do ' a-hala mak kden la a ih'ru-ralmu ed maka kawewal nan a ' u .
For I know that in me , that is , in my flesh , dwells no good thing . For desire is present with me , but I do n't find it doing that which is good . ||| Agat niohora la ' a ino'nu di de kalwiedwedni oke ' mana hadamonan meman la a ih'ru ralmu la ' a a yehwa rimormio'ru di . Yoma plollolli de a ' g e wuaror nan walia nhioli-lieta kalwiedwedni mere hota a ' g edonna ghi ' nan walia .
For the good which I desire , I do n't do , but the evil which I do n't desire , that I practice . ||| De a ' g edonna ghi ' kalwiedwedni maka agiwra ghi ' a . Mere a ralma-rio'ru nawnial dioin pa aghi ' targho ' a hya ' mak kyata-khala , mak a ralmu edonna na'oin nana .
But if what I do n't desire , that I do , it is no more I that do it , but sin which dwells in me . ||| Pa hota la'pa aghi ' nana hya ' ed maka a ralmu edonna na'oin nan de , hade ed mak ktutga de a ' g edonna liernohora a wniaro'ru pa aghi ' nan hare , mere aghi ' emkade yoma do ' a-hala ed maka kodi plolli la a ' u .
I find then the law that , while I desire to do good , evil is present . ||| Pede awuarora de hota nhi'inde emkadille , la'pa agiwra ghi ' a samomuou , demade enekneka maka ghi ' nana de yatyatni-halalli .
For I delight in God 's law after the inward person , ||| Yoma a ralma-rio'ru de , nwayow nohor meman la Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni
but I see a different law in my members , warring against the law of my mind , and bringing me into captivity under the law of sin which is in my members . ||| mere emkade ho'mana , la a ino'nu di , de do ' a-hala mak kden rer lia a ih'ru ralamni la ' a a yehwa rimormio'ru di edon namneh nohora deulu-tatra maka a ralma-rio'ru ha nko ' i nana pa emekanekama rrora e ra'ara . Ne hota emolmolan nekama a'uwniatiehra wut lia do ' a-hala maka kagengeni la ' a a ih'ru ralmu .
What a wretched man I am ! Who will deliver me out of the body of this death ? ||| Inee ! A ralma-rio'ru nodi a lia kropna-krieutu yoma a ralma-rio'ru edon namtemna ! Hota emkameni la a mormio'ru dina ? Hota he ' ed maka kamori-kalewna a inon mak kod a lia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa dina de ?
I thank God through Jesus Christ , our Lord ! So then with the mind , I myself serve God 's law , but with the flesh , sin 's law . ||| Mere hota a ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna yoma E ' ed mak kodi plolli pa Namori-nalewn a lia do ' a-hala mak kodi plolli la a ino'nu yoma la ' a Yesus Kristus Itmatromlawanni . La ' hare honona pede ina-nara ama-hyali , itamkek memna de , la'pa Yesus Kristus edon Ntulan ma'ta a ' die de hota agal toto ' memna a ino'nu tetema pa agiwra liernohor reria Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni de mere a yehwa rimormio'ru di natlin to ' a la do ' a-hala .
There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus , who do n't walk according to the flesh , but according to the Spirit . ||| La ' hade pede , ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' a it maka kor wutga Kristus Yesus la ' olek la id wa , de dodo'ondi de meman pa Uplerlawna niukamnu edonna ntai owa'an ita .
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death . ||| Yoma la ' a Kristus Yesus hihi'ini pede Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak kala mormiori-dardiari ed maka kharia talan warwuaru mai ita . De la ' Nhiwni kniarni la it ihranu ralamni de , pede Nhiwni de ed maka kolin doinia it la do ' a-hala mak kodia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
For what the law could n't do , in that it was weak through the flesh , God did , sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin , he condemned sin in the flesh , ||| Yoma agama deullu-tatarni ta'en niana nwe'er doin it la do ' a-hala , totpena do ' a-hal edon nodi plolli owa'an mai ita , yoma rimormiori rakleh ruri-lai pa rlernohor reria agama deullu-tatarni . Mere Uplerlawna ed mak kwe'er doin ita totpena do ' a-hala edon nodi plolli owa'an mai ita , yoma Enhopan doinia E A'na wamueheni pa Nmai lia nohkeran di totpa hota Nwal lia hoihoi-tantiani persembahan pa Ntuw niana-nhai nian ita . La ' ler de de A'na de Nwal lia rimormiori pa emekwali ita , mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala mere E edon Nhi ' do ' a-hala . La ' talan mak emkade pede Uplerlawna ed maka Nukmua E A'nani la rimormior ita rerieini .
that the ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in us who do n't walk according to the flesh , but according to the Spirit . ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' emkade totpena Nhar tialla totpena itlernohor reri E ralma-riorni maka kayamkek la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni . Itsi ' emkade itlernohora Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli wniayownohorni . It edon tlernohora it yehwa rimormiorni mak kod it la yatyatni-halalli .
For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh , but those who live according to the Spirit , the things of the Spirit . ||| Riy maka kmori-kdari rlernohora yehwa rimormiorni de , de nwaror mamain to ' a yehwa rimormiorni maka yotyotni-yatyatni maka ka'hira la ralma-riorni . Mere riy maka kmori-kdar lia Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli wniayownohorni , de nwaror nana mamainia hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Ha Nwayow nohora .
For the mind of the flesh is death , but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace , ||| La la'pa ralma-riormi de nden rer mamain la yehwa rimormiormi mak kod miy lia do ' a-hala , de hota mlier la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . Mere la'pa ralma-riormi nden rer mamain la Uplerlawna Nhiwni wniayownohorni de miy ihrami ralamni hota namtiertiernu , me hota mmiormiori pa nodi liarni .
because the mind of the flesh is hostile toward God , for it is not subject to God 's law , neither indeed can it be . ||| Riy maka ralma-riorni nden rer lia ralma-rior rimormiorni mak kodi do ' a-hal de , de riy de hota nora Uplerlawna ra'ara yoma riy de edonna nru ' u-ntowar la Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni . La'pa niwra nlernohora deulu-tatra de nek de ta'en niana .
Those who are in the flesh ca n't please God . ||| Riy mak kmori-kdari rlernohora yehwa rimormiorni , ta'eni nhi ' nana hya ' ed mak kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni .
But you are not in the flesh but in the Spirit , if it is so that the Spirit of God dwells in you . But if any man does n't have the Spirit of Christ , he is not his . ||| Mere miy edonna mmiormiori pa mliernohora yehwa rimormiormi mak kodi miy lia do ' a-hala . Miy e mliernohora Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli yala'ani , yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak kagengen lia miy inonmi . Mpiahniorta ! Riy mak kakleha Yesus Kristus Nhiwni de , riy de , Yesus Kristus gahani atia ' e ' a .
If Christ is in you , the body is dead because of sin , but the spirit is alive because of righteousness . ||| Hota miy inonmi nmati yoma la ' do ' a-hala mere la'pa Yesus Kristus etla miy ralammi de hota miy mliernan mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Hota mliernan mormior die , yoma Uplerlawna Net olek la de mlier wut lia mak kaplol la E yamkekni pa mior E ' pa mkialwied owa'ana .
But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you , he who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you . ||| Uplerlawna Nhiwni , mak kamori-kalewna Yesus la matmiatni ralamni , etla miy ihrami ralamni , pa hota Uplerlawna mak kamori-kalewna Yesus Kristus la matmiatni de , hota ed maka kamori-kalewan walia miy inonmi mak kler la matmiati ralamni . Hota Enhi ' nana de yoma Nhiwni mak kmormior lia miy inonmi de .
So then , brothers , we are debtors , not to the flesh , to live after the flesh . ||| La ' hade pede , ina-nara ama-hyali , itlernana Uplerlawna Nhiwni mak khopna pa itsi ' a-tyapia samomuou . Mere edonna Nhopn it pa totpena itlernohor it yehwani rimormiorni mak kodi it la do ' a-hala ralamni .
For if you live after the flesh , you must die , but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body , you will live . ||| Yoma hota la'pa miy e mliernohora yehwa rimormiorni de hota mlier la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . Mere la'pa mdien rer lia Uplerlawna Nhiwni de , totpa la talan emkade pede miy edon mliernohor owa'ana nhiolmi-lietmi maka khi ' do ' a-hal de , de hota mlier la mormiori plalahwa .
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God , these are children of God . ||| Riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodia de Uplerlawna upni-a'nani irhatta .
For you did n't receive the spirit of bondage again to fear , but you received the Spirit of adoption , by whom we cry , Abba ! Father ! ||| Itamkek memna hadi yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni maka Enala mai it de , hota edonna Nhi ' it pa tamta'ata pa emeknekama upa-matroma mak khi ' atni pa namta'ata . Rwaldioinia de , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nhi ' itla ' Uplerlawna upni-a'nani . Pa hota la ' Nhiw de hihi'ini de , pede itpolga Uplerlawna la it Amni maka Nsayni ita .
The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are children of God , ||| Uplerlawna Nhiwni orgahani ed mak kar lia ita ralma-riorni pa Nakot nohora it di de Uplerlawna upni-a'nani ita .
and if children , then heirs-heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ , if indeed we suffer with him , that we may also be glorified with him . ||| Ne la ' it de E a'nani ita , de hota it er maka klernana ra'ani-pallu pripanni-fa'anni la E ' a pa emeka re ' a-tniaru maka ina-ama rhi'taru la ' a upni-a'nani . Hota itlernan hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nhi'targa la ' a Yesus Kristus . Itora Yesus Kristus rewre'wa pa itler la kropna-krieutu yawuhi-yawe'eta pede hota it mana tler walia ya'uli-yawedi pa emekwalia E ' a .
For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which will be revealed toward us . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mormiori-dardiari maka khita-krepra klipa-ka'ma maka hota Uplerlawna Nala de , hota narehi lawlawan meman la ' a lui-nuhru polpuolu-wakwaka honona maka itlernan olek la ' lera-mela ri . Pede la ' a wniaro'ru de la'pa itwaror nohora hare honona mak hota Uplerlawna Nala de , de it luini-nuhranu ri edon rrekan nan wali .
For the creation waits with eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed . ||| Hya'-hya ' honona maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayap niana la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni mana rwewiei-rnarnara la ' a hya ' ler ed maka Uplerlawna hota Ntutga de upni-a'nani ita .
For the creation was subjected to vanity , not of its own will , but because of him who subjected it , in hope ||| Yoma noh di nor mniotni e rolin doini oleka pa hota edon nlernan samomuounu maka Uplerlawna Nwaror nan ulga pa noh di nlernana . Mere emeknekama noh di mniotni edonna nodia ralma-rior wamueheni mere onnila Uplerlawna ed maka kolin doini nohkeran di pa emkade . Mere la'pa emkade ho'mana emeknekama maka Ha Nakoki-nayap niana re nhia'argenni eda di ,
that the creation itself also will be delivered from the bondage of decay into the liberty of the glory of the children of God . ||| de totpa hota Uplerlawna Nollia noh di mniotni pa edonna rler owa'an la wnieyata-wnianiawu , matmiati-molmuolu , gehpa-ta'la totpa hota ror wutga Uplerlawna upni-a'nani rler la ha samomuou meman de .
For we know that the whole creation groans and travails in pain together until now . ||| Ita tatga de , la ' ululu memna la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la dodo'ondi mana , ora-au , nhiuri-wnia'ana la'pa hare honona maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayap niana emeknekama e rkoko ' a-rherera yoma e ramehra , pa hota emeknekama patke ' a ida mak kamehra-kamau niohora nayoria a'nani .
Not only so , but ourselves also , who have the first fruits of the Spirit , even we ourselves groan within ourselves , waiting for adoption , the redemption of our body . ||| Ne edon riwra hare to ' a mere makpesiay it hononit mana it ihranu ralamni e nko ' a-nkakur wali . Yoma itlernan oleka Uplerlawna Nhiwni maka Uplerlawna Nala mai ita pa emeka ra'ani-pallu mak kala ' ulu , mere ita twewiei-tnarnar ma'ta ler maka Uplerlawna Nala ra'ani-pallu korni maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la E a'nani ita , de hota itlernan inon warwuaru mak hota edon kmati owa'ana .
For we were saved in hope , but hope that is seen is not hope . For who hopes for that which he sees ? ||| Yoma mulaliaini la ' ler maka itpesiay de it tsa'ar it aranni la ' hota itlernan hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru de mai ita . Mere la'pa hya ' ed mak it tsa'ar it aranni de , itlernan oleka wa , de it edon twaror owa'ana hade . Yoma riy edonna rha'ar aranni la hya ' maka ha rlernana oleka hade wa .
But if we hope for that which we do n't see , we wait for it with patience . ||| Mere hya ' maka itsa'ar ma'ta it aranni la pa hota itlernana , de twewiei niohora .
In the same way , the Spirit also helps our weaknesses , for we do n't know how to pray as we ought . But the Spirit himself makes intercession for us with groanings which ca n't be uttered . ||| Emekwalima itsa'ar it ralamni la ' hade , de hota emkade walia itsa'ar it ralamni la Uplerlawna Nhiwni Naruri-nalai me Ntutga talan mai ita , la'pa takleha ruri-lai onde itaplin niohora yala'ani . Yoma taplin niohora ma'ta emkameni la itsumbaini . Mere la'pa it ralma-riorni naplahwa pa itodia la Uplerlawna yoma it ralma-riorni de ta'en niana itakot nohora , de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nmeh ' a ed maka kwak la Uplerlawna mai ita .
He who searches the hearts knows what is on the Spirit 's mind , because he makes intercession for the saints according to God . ||| Ne hota Uplerlawna , mak kat niohora rimormiori it ralamni , pena E nekpa Nat niohora Nhiwni yala'ani plolli la it polpuolu-wakwakni , de Uplerlawna Nat niohora de Nhiwni de Nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pa Nwak la Uplerlawna onnila makpesiay polpuollu-wakwakni .
We know that all things work together for good for those who love God , for those who are called according to his purpose . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , it hononit maka ralamni nden rer lia Uplerlawna , maka Uplerlawna e Npolga pa tlernohora E ralma-riora maka Enwaror nan olekwa , itatga de hya ' mak kalwiedweda la'pa kropna-krieutu , lui-nuhru maka itlernana la it mormiorni di , de hota Uplerlawna ed maka khi ' a totpena nod it la kalwieda-paitiota .
For whom he foreknew , he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son , that he might be the firstborn among many brothers . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nwalir nian oleka it maka Enat niohor meman la ululu de hota itpesiay E ' a , pa tlernohora E A'nani Yesus de yehwani-liakatni . Pede tor Yesus de twahyali , ne Uplerlawna Nhi ' Yesus la a'na yanulu la makpesiay it hononita .
Whom he predestined , those he also called . Whom he called , those he also justified . Whom he justified , those he also glorified . ||| Uplerlawna Nwalir niana olek ita me Npolg it pa itpesiay E ' a . Noma Nhi ' it wal pia itor E ' pa tkalwied owa'ana . Ne hota it yehwani nlernohor E yehwani mak samomuou memna me narehi-nalawna .
What then shall we say about these things ? If God is for us , who can be against us ? ||| La ' hade pede itat niohor meman de , onnila Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni mak karehi memna re mai ita , pede ta'en niana riy id mana natowar nan it la ' yawa , yoma Uplerlawna Nod nian ita .
He who did n't spare his own Son , but delivered him up for us all , how would he not also with him freely give us all things ? ||| Itat niohora hade yoma Uplerlawna A'na wamueheni nek de , E ' edonna Nreiya la gera tlinni-ai aratni Nalewna mere Nalla pa rira rwunu-rwenna E ' la it rerieini . Enala A'nani mai ita pede itat niohora memna hota Nal to ' a hya ' a maka takleha la it mormiorni-dardiarni .
Who could bring a charge against God 's chosen ones ? It is God who justifies . ||| It er maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana , pede ta'en niana riy rwaghal it la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni . Yoma Uplerlawna ed maka ketlia de it er mak kaplol la E yamkekni .
Who is he who condemns ? It is Christ who died , yes rather , who was raised from the dead , who is at the right hand of God , who also makes intercession for us . ||| Toto ' a pa ta'en niana riy id mana rwaghal ita . Yoma Kristus Yesus Nmeh ' a ed mak kod nian ita . E ' ed maka kmati olekwa la it rerieini , mere Enmori owa'ana pa Nora Uplerlawna la ' gen miaka ha ra'uli-rawedi . Ne la ' hande de Nsumbain reri it la ' Uplerlawna .
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ ? Could oppression , or anguish , or persecution , or famine , or nakedness , or peril , or sword ? ||| La'pa riy id mana onde hya'-hya ' to ' a de ta'en niana rhi ' oruli-augewat la Kristus sniayanni de mai ita . La'pa itler la lui-nuhru , yamuki-yama'ala , yakropna-yakrieutu , rehka-lara , takleha-taplara onde itler la hya ' to'owa mak kodi it la kropna-krieutu lawna , la'pa rala wehla ra rwunu-rwen it ho'mana Uplerlawna Ntut rer ma'ta sniayanni la it mormiorni .
Even as it is written , For your sake we are killed all day long . We were accounted as sheep for the slaughter . ||| Hade emekwalima Daud lirni la Uplerlawna maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni riwra , Lelera-melmel de , amapalia matmiati-molmuolu la ' O rerieimu Uplerlawnu nee ! Rhi ' am die emeknekama duma maka ha riwra rotna tiernu .
No , in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us . ||| Mere itlernan hare honona ho'mana edon ratowar nan ita . Mere it di de emolmolla neka me mak karehi meman la ara la ' a hare honona de yoma Kristus mak ktulla-ksayni ita .
For I am persuaded that neither death , nor life , nor angels , nor principalities , nor things present , nor things to come , nor powers , ||| Yoma apuesiay memna la'pa itmati onde itler la kropna-krieut la it mormiorni di , la'pa Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu onde hegana-kawnu yatni-rha'ani , la'pa hya ' ed maka ha rhi ' nana la lerni-melli ri onde la ' ler mak itapal rieri , la'pa makaruri-kalai maka ktorna-krautu la nohkeran di
nor height , nor depth , nor any other created thing will be able to separate us from God 's love which is in Christ Jesus our Lord . ||| onde mak kodi plolli mak kden la lyanit marna uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani , onde hya'-hya ' la ' a noheri woru-lyanti nayanni tetema , hare honona re ta'en niana rhi ' oruli-augewat la Uplerlawna sniayanni mai ita . Sniayanni de ed maka Uplerlawna Ntut la it di la ' a Itmatromni Kristus Yesus hihi'ini la it rerieini .
I tell the truth in Christ . I am not lying , my conscience testifying with me in the Holy Spirit ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , hya ' ed maka agiwra ukot di de ha plollola de . A ' g edonna ulahara . Yoma a ' di de Yesus Kristus gahani a ' u me a ih'ru ralmu de , Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak kodi plolli , me Enhi ' a ' pua agatga de a li'ru ri ha raplola .
that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart . ||| Pede hota miy miat meman de la ' lera-lera nekpa a ralmu nmalui dioin me ihru-ralmu naklierta
For I could wish that I myself were accursed from Christ for my brothers ' sake , my relatives according to the flesh ||| yoma la ' a a i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu la ' a makden Yahudi , a mutwua'lu re rwayotlia Yesus . A ralmu naplele'er pa Uplerlawna Nukmu a ' u me Nhopliala a lia Yesus Kristus onni hornama hade nod ir la yamori-yalewna .
who are Israelites , whose is the adoption , the glory , the covenants , the giving of the law , the service , and the promises , ||| Yoma makden Yahudi re rlernan oleka unut lawna . Ir er maka Israel nadurit nana yoma Uplerlawna ed maka kwaliri ir pa Nhi ' a la a'nani me Entut walia E plolli-mneheni mak khitita-kreprepra la ira . E ' ed maka kakot targ nnio'oni re la ira , me Nal walia agama deullu-tatarni la ira . Uplerlawna ed mak kwatut ir la talla plollola pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla la E ' a . Nnio ' a harahu er maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la ira .
of whom are the fathers , and from whom is Christ as concerning the flesh , who is over all , God , blessed forever . Amen . ||| Yahudi re upni-tgarni de Abraham , Isak , me Yakopa maka nhi'inde rwetwet la kotni-nanni . Ne mak kareh mieman de , Yesus Kristus Nwatiawu walia ira . Yesus de Uplerlawna inhatta mak karehelia hare honona , pede ya'uli-yawedi etla E ' a pa nodi liarni Amin Plola .
But it is not as though the word of God has come to nothing . For they are not all Israel that are of Israel . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' emkameni ho'mana Yahudi re harahu rwayotlia Yesus Kristus de , mere hade edon nhi ' oruli-augewat la Uplerlawna nnio'oni maka Ha Nakot targ oleka la Abraham , Isak me Yakopa . Yoma eneknek to ' a riy dom to ' a la makden Yahudi maka Israel nadurit nana re er maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana pa Nhi ' a la E gahani totpa rlernana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nakot targa .
Neither , because they are Abraham 's offspring , are they all children . But , your offspring will be accounted as from Isaac . ||| Emkade walia Abraham duratni-waitni dom de edon rla ' wutga la ' riy maka ha rhoiya la Abraham upni-a'nani maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana totpa rlernana hya ' ed maka Ha Nakot targa . Mere Uplerlawna Nwalir nian Isak pa nlernan nnio ' maka Enakot targa oleka , yoma lirni la Abraham Niwra , Isak to ' pa ed maka kadurit nana o upmu-a'namu mak klernan A nnio ' u di .
That is , it is not the children of the flesh who are children of God , but the children of the promise are counted as heirs . ||| Hade nnia'eratni de Abraham duratni-waitni maka rweta la Uplerlawna upni-a'nani , de mak ha riwra duratni-waitni mak ha rano'taru , ne edon riwra duratni-waitni honona .
For this is a word of promise , At the appointed time I will come , and Sarah will have a son . ||| Uplerlawna nnio'oni la Abraham de emkadilla , Anni id owa'an de Amuai ne , la ' ler de Sara na ' a'n nan oleka a'na muanke ' a ida .
Not only so , but Rebekah also conceived by one , by our father Isaac . ||| Ne hota emkade wali la Ribka lerni , de Ribka mana na ' a'na walia a'na dio ' a muanke ' a woru . A'na dio ' a re amni de Isaka , makden Yahudi upni-tgarni de .
For being not yet born , neither having done anything good or bad , that the purpose of God according to election might stand , not of works , but of him who calls , it was said to her , The elder will serve the younger . ||| Mere la'pa a'na dio ' a re edonna rmor nian ma'ta , ne edonna rhi ' nan ma'ta hadomdom pa yamkekni samoga onde yata , de Uplerlawna Nwaliri oleka matni enni . Totpa Ntut memna , de Uplerlawna Nwalir die edonna Namkek la rira hihi'ini-yapyapni mere Nlernohora hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Ntota pa Npol niana onnila E ralma-rior wamueheni . Yoma Ribka a'nani rora edon rhi ' ma'ta hya ' mak kaplola onde mak khala mere Uplerlawna Nakot oleka la Ribka , Hota a'namu gari nodi plolli la ' yanulu .
Even as it is written , Jacob I loved , but Esau I hated . ||| Hade emekwalima Uplerlawna lirni maka ha rhorat targa la ' a Puka ralamni de Niwra , Yakop a'na gari de hota A'ura ' a-upalga mere Esau a'na yanullu de hota A ' g edonna tiutga A ra ' u-pa'lu .
What shall we say then ? Is there unrighteousness with God ? May it never be ! ||| Hya ' ed maka hota itwarora la dodo'ondi ? Uplerlawna wnialirni-wniayohoni de itlernan plolli-mneheni me edonna ? Meman nek la Uplerlawna Naplola-namneha !
For he said to Moses , I will have mercy on whom I have mercy , and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nakot la Musa , Hota Atiutga A sniaynu la ' a riy maka hota A ralmu ha nala , me hota tiutga A ralam kalwie'du la ' a riy maka Agiwa tiutga la .
So then it is not of him who wills , nor of him who runs , but of God who has mercy . ||| Pede Uplerlawna Nwalir riy , de edonna nawniair la rimormiori ida wniaror wamueheni mak kod ir pa rhi ' a-ryapi hadom pa totpena hota Uplerlawna Nreinian ira , mere nawniair to'ola Uplerlawna ralma-rior wamueheni pede Uplerlawna Ntutga sniayanni la riy de .
For the Scripture says to Pharaoh , For this very purpose I caused you to be raised up , that I might show in you my power , and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth . ||| Itamkek memna hade la Puka ralamni maka e rhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni la ray Mesir , de Niwra , A ' g ed maka kran o ' la ray , yoma la ' a A ralma-rio'ru di to ' a , de totpa la ' o wawanmu de hota Atiutga A plo'lu-mneh ' u ru'ru-la'yu me Aghi ' a A na'nu pa riy ra'uli-rawedi la ' a noheri woru-lyanti nayanni .
So then , he has mercy on whom he desires , and he hardens whom he desires . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , itamkek memna de Uplerlawna Niwra Ntutga sniayanni la ' riy ida , de hade ed maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a . Me la'pa Uplerlawna Niwra Natehra riy ida ralma-riorni emekwalima ray Mesir de , de hade ed maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana .
You will say then to me , Why does he still find fault ? For who withstands his will ? ||| Dodo'ondi de yanpa hota riy id tiy miy die nakota mai a ' u , niwra , La'pa Uplerlawna ed maka Ha Nror targa hare honona , hya ' ed mak kariei piede Uplerlawna Niwra Nwaghala ma'ta rimormiori it di la ' it do'oni-halli ? Riy id mana edonna nwayotlia Uplerlawna ralma-riorni toh ? !
But indeed , O man , who are you to reply against God ? Will the thing formed ask him who formed it , Why did you make me like this ? ||| Mere hota awuahla riy de yatianni , Miy die rimormior tio ' miy . Ne miy di de yana mpiaran pia mpiahla Uplerlawna lirni ! Mpiaror teka ! Hota plol walia la rana ida natian walia riy maka kar niana ran de pa niwra , Nihya'pa omkiar a ' die emkadina de ?
Or has n't the potter a right over the clay , from the same lump to make one part a vessel for honor , and another for dishonor ? ||| Miplinga de riy mak kakoki-kayapia ran de , ed maka kodi plolli pa Nakokoma-napapala tan miera de plolli nek la e ralma-riorni ? ! La ' a tan wioka ida , de riy maka kar die nodi plolli pa nhi ' a rana woru , de ida samoga , korni de edon samoga toh !
What if God , willing to show his wrath and to make his power known , endured with much patience vessels of wrath prepared for destruction , ||| Emkade walia hya ' a ed maka Uplerlawna e Niwra Nhi ' a de hota Nhi ' a . E ralma-riorni totpena hota Entutga hankeranni-ralmha'arni la mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala ne Enala plolli-mneheni rurni-laini na Nukmua re totpena riy ramkek memna plolli-mneheni de . Mere Enhur rierer niohor ma'ta ralmha'arni la ' a ira , maka Enwahi ' targ oleka pa hota Ha Nukmua pa rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
and that he might make known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy , which he prepared beforehand for glory- ||| Uplerlawna ralma-riorni de totpena la ' talan mak emkade pede Entutga ra'ani-pallu mak karehi-kalawna la riy maka Nsaynia re , de la riy maka Ha Nwahi ' targ oleka totpena rlernana mormiori-dardiari la Ilyamou-Watyatoha mak liplipa-kamka'ma . La ' talan emkade pede ramkek nana E nhiolli mak kalwiedwed meman de .
us , whom he also called , not from the Jews only , but also from the Gentiles ? ||| Ne hota it di de er maka Ha Npolg oleka wa . Edonna ntot nan to ' a Yahudi re rmeh ' a mere la ' a riy dom maka Yahudi atia ' mana , Npol wualia .
As he says also in Hosea , I will call them ‘ my people , ' which were not my people , and her ‘ beloved , ' who was not beloved . ||| Rakot nohora walia hadi la ' a Hosea Pukni ralamni , de e rhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni la ' a Yahudi atia ' a re , Niwra , Riy maka edonna kler wut lia A mu'tu-rah ' u de hota Awueta la a mu'tu-rah ' u . Durti-waiti maka A ' g edonna tiutga A ralam kalwie'du mana hota Awualdioinia pa Atiutga A ralam kalwie'du la .
It will be that in the place where it was said to them , ‘ You are not my people , ' there they will be called ‘ children of the living God . ' ||| Me e rhorat targ walia riwra , La ' ululu Uplerlawna Niwra , Miy edonna mior wut lia A mu'tu-rah ' u , mere la ' dodo'ondi Nwet ir la Uplerlawna mak kden pa nodi liarni upni-a'nani .
Isaiah cries concerning Israel , If the number of the children of Israel are as the sand of the sea , it is the remnant who will be saved , ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya nhar lirni pa nakot nohor walia Israel rimormiorni niwra , Riy Israel miy die rimormiormi emeknekama en liu'wu-tan miakmu . Mere hota riy dom rmeh ' a er maka kler la mormiori-lewlewna .
for he will finish the work and cut it short in righteousness , because the Lord will make a short work upon the earth . ||| Yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a hota plet pa Nteta tniu'utu lawna la mei me Nhudi-npara la ' a watghudi lokarni , la ' a riy mak kden la nohkerna wawannu .
As Isaiah has said before , Unless the Lord of Armies had left us a seed , we would have become like Sodom , and would have been made like Gomorrah . ||| Emkade walia hya ' ed maka Yesaya nror targa niwra , Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu maktorna-makrautu haneknek wawannu de edonna Nal taru it duratni-waitni riy ida-woru re mana , hota Yahudi it di mana tmat momuou pa emekwalima mak kden la leta Sodom nora Gomora maka Uplerlawna Nweyata-nwaniawua .
What shall we say then ? That the Gentiles , who did n't follow after righteousness , attained to righteousness , even the righteousness which is of faith , ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , ha nnia'eratni de emkadilla , Riy makden Yahudi atia ' a , edonna rwahak pa rora Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana . Mere la ' lera-mela ri onnila ir pesiayni la Yesus Kristus pede Uplerlawna Nor wut ir pa rkalwied owa'ana .
but Israel , following after a law of righteousness , did n't arrive at the law of righteousness . ||| Hota rwaldioini owa'ana de riy Yahudi e rha'ar tar aranni la deulu-tatra totpena irora Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana . Mere ira edonna rlernan talan pa rora Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana .
Why ? Because they did n't seek it by faith , but as it were by works of the law . They stumbled over the stumbling stone , ||| Hya ' a nrei pia ir edonna rlernan talan pa rora Uplerlawna rkalwieda ? Yoma hihi'ini-yapyapni de edonna rha'ara aranni la Uplerlawna talanni mak kaplola , de ir edon rpesiaya Yesus Kristus , mere rlernohor neka agama deullu-tatarni . La ' ir wniarorni de totpa hota Uplerlawna Nreinian ira . Irwayotil talan onnila Yesus pa hota emeknekama rtuini-rdai lia wat muaka kaniewta .
even as it is written , Behold , I lay in Zion a stumbling stone and a rock of offense , and no one who believes in him will be disappointed . ||| Ne la Puka ralamni e rakot nohor Yesus de emkadilla , Mimkek la hadi ! De la ' a Sion de A ' g e wuatatg oleka watu id wa . Wat die watu nniuli-nniewta narieiniande irwetur tar lia pa rlerwah ' a gaini . Mere riy korni makpesiay la ' E ' a , edon ramta'ata rha'ar aranni la , yoma hota Enhi ' nan maka Enakot targ oleka re .
Brothers , my heart 's desire and my prayer to God is for Israel , that they may be saved . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , a ralmu nwak toto ' memna pa totpena a hairwia'lu Yahudi rimormiorni rlernana mormiori-lewlewna , pede a ' muana siumbain rer mamain ir la Uplerlawna .
For I testify about them that they have a zeal for God , but not according to knowledge . ||| Hya ' maka ukot di naplola , de Yahudi re irape'el olek pa rhu'ru-rhelam la Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni . Mere raplin niohora talla plollola maka Uplerlawna Nala pa ror E ' pa rkalwieda .
For being ignorant of God 's righteousness , and seeking to establish their own righteousness , they did n't subject themselves to the righteousness of God . ||| Rtot pa raplinu Uplerlawna ralma-riorni la ' emkameni totpena rkalwied owa'ana . Ne iriwra rlernohora ira ralma-rior wamueheni pa ror E ' pa rkalwieda , pede ir edonna rreiniana talan maka Uplerlawna Ntut oleka de .
For Christ is the fulfillment of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes . ||| Mere la ' a Yesus Kristus hihi'ini la matmiatni pede riy edon rlernohor owa'ana agama deullu-tatarni totpena ror Uplerlawna rkalwieda . Pa hota la E ' a pede riy honona maka kpesiaya re hota rora Uplerlawna mana rkalwied olekwa .
For Moses writes about the righteousness of the law , The one who does them will live by them . ||| Ina-nara ama hyali , la ' a Musa Pukni ralamni de enhorat targa la ' a riy mak kiwra kora Uplerlawna rkalwieda yoma rlernohora agama deullu-tatarni , eniwra , Enekneka riy maka edonna kpera-kdaitia agama deullu-tatarni id to ' la ' mormiorni ralamni nampena nler la mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But the righteousness which is of faith says this , Do n't say in your heart , ‘ Who will ascend into heaven ? ' that is , to bring Christ down , ||| Mere la'pa riy maka kora Uplerlawna rkalwieda yoma la ' a pesiayni la Yesus Kristus , de ed walia la Puka ralamni de niwra , Yana mpiarora-mpialaiya la ' a ralammi , hota he ' ed maka kler la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , nnia'eratni de hota he ' nodia Yesus Kristus pa Nernu totpa enakot nohora mai ita la kot maka kakot nohora yamori-yalewna .
or , ‘ Who will descend into the abyss ? ' that is , to bring Christ up from the dead . ||| Onde , He ' ed maka hota kerun la noh mati-rai miolu ? Nnia'eratni de he ' nma nrana Yesus Kristus la matmiatni ralamni totpena Nakot nohora kot dena .
But what does it say ? The word is near you , in your mouth and in your heart , that is , the word of faith which we preach , ||| Mere Musa nakot neka niwra , Kot mak kodia mormiori-lewlewan de edon oliet tiy miy . Hota mpiarora-mpialaiya la miy ralammi de . Me miatu mikot nohora . Ne kot de ed maka amakot nohora walia totpa hota mimpiesiaya , de nhi'inde amiwra ,
that if you will confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead , you will be saved . ||| La'pa miy nurmi nwayow nana Yesus la rira gaini ralamni pa miwra , Yesus de Orgahi-Orha ' a inhatta , me mpiesiaya la miy ralammi de Uplerlawna ed maka kamori-kalewna Yesus la ' matmiati ralamni , de hota mimliernana mormiori plalahwa .
For with the heart one believes resulting in righteousness , and with the mouth confession is made resulting in salvation . ||| Yoma la ' a mimpiesiaya la ralammi pede Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana miy pa emeknekama riy maka kora Uplerlawna rkalwieda . Ne la ' a nurmi mak kwayow nohora Yesus de Orgahi-Orha ' a inhatta pa hota Namori-nalewna miy .
For the Scripture says , Whoever believes in him will not be disappointed . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , itat niohora hade naplola yoma la ' a Puka ralamni e rhorat targa , La ' riy maka kpesiaya de hota edon ramta'ata rha'ar aranni la , yoma hota Enhi ' nan maka Enakot targa oleka re .
For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek , for the same Lord is Lord of all , and is rich to all who call on him . ||| Hota Uplerlawna Ntut momuoga hadella riy honona . E yamkekni edonna to ' a-taiya la ' a riy Yahudi nor wutga rira dom to ' a . Yoma E ' de Orgahi-Orha ' a inhatta la ' a rimormiori honona . E ' ed mak ktutu sniayanni pa Nala yara'ani-yapallu narehi-nalawna la ' a riy honona maka kwaka tniulla-sniayn la E ' a .
For , Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved . ||| Hade emeknekama e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de e riwra , Hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala yamori-yalewna plalahwa la he'-he ' mak kwaka yamori-yalewan de la ' E ' a .
How then will they call on him in whom they have not believed ? How will they believe in him whom they have not heard ? How will they hear without a preacher ? ||| Mere hota emkameni la riy rwak Itmatromlawanni pa Namori-nalewna ira la'pa ir edon rpesiay ma'ta la E ' a ? Ne emkameni la irpesiaya la Itmatromlawanni mere ir edon ratlin nohor ma'ta E ' a ? Ne hota emkameni la iratlin nohora Itmatromlawanni mere riy edon rmai pia rakot nohora E ' a la ' ira .
And how will they preach unless they are sent ? As it is written , How beautiful are the feet of those who preach the Good News of peace , who bring glad tidings of good things ! ||| Ne emkameni walia riy rodi kota la ' ira la'pa ir edon rhopan pa rmai ? Pede emeknekama e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de niwra , Ha ramuki-rahepur nohora riy mak kmai pia kodia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna .
But they did n't all listen to the glad news . For Isaiah says , Lord , who has believed our report ? ||| Mere Israel duratni-waitni re ratlin nana Kot Kalwied de , mere eneknek to'ama Israel duratni-waitni dom to ' a rreiniana-ra'nana Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de pa rpesiaya . Yoma emeknekama makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya lirni niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' u ne ! Enekneka riy ida-woru rmeh ' a er maka kpesiaya a Kot Kalwiedwed mamni di !
So faith comes by hearing , and hearing by the word of God . ||| La ' hare honona pede itat niohora de riy e rpesiaya yoma iratlin nana Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a Yesus Kristus , maka ha rakot nohor oleka re .
But I say , did n't they hear ? Yes , most certainly , Their sound went out into all the earth , their words to the ends of the world . ||| Mere yanpa plola de Israel re edonna ratlin ma'ta kot de me ? Hota edon emkade ! Plola ratlin oleka wa . Yoma Puka enakota niwra , E rakot nohor oleka la hare honona la ' noheri woru-lyanti nayanni . Pa lirni-tunnu honona de nwewr olek la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni .
But I ask , did n't Israel know ? First Moses says , I will provoke you to jealousy with that which is no nation . I will make you angry with a nation void of understanding . ||| Mere yanpa hota riy Israel re edon rna'erit nana lira-tunu maka ha ratlin nana rena ? Hota edon emkade wali ! Ira rna'erit nana yoma Yahudi atia ' a nek de rna'erit nan oleka wa . Itat niohora hade yoma Musa ed maka kakot nohor ulga ha yala'ani , de Musa nwahaur nohora Uplerlawna lirni mak kiwra , Hota Aghi ' Yahudi miy pia ralammi ramehra cemburu , yoma A'ura ' a-upalga Yahudi atia ' a maka ha mpiarwah ' a re . Ne Aghi ' Yahudi miy pia miwenna , la ' a Atiera-diema Yahudi atia ' a re maka mimpiarora de raplinu-raplo ' a .
Isaiah is very bold and says , I was found by those who did n't seek me . I was revealed to those who did n't ask for me . ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu Yesaya mana , nparan tioto ' meman pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni la ' a Israel duratni-waitni atia ' a re , niwra , Hota riy maka edonna kwahak A ' u , er mak kwatrom A ' u . Yoma Atiutga A ino'nu la ir maka edonna kwahaka A ' u .
But about Israel he says , All day long I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people . ||| Mere la ' a Israel duratni-waitni wniahaurnohorni , Yesaya nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni Niwra , La ' lelera-melmel de Awuak la A mu'tu totpa ror A ' u mkalwieda owa'ana mere rahmena ra'unni-ramta'ata me rahmena ratlin la A li'ru-tu'nu .
I ask then , did God reject his people ? May it never be ! For I also am an Israelite , a descendant of Abraham , of the tribe of Benjamin . ||| Pede , hota la'pa emkade de , yanpa Uplerlawna edonna Nreiniana-na'nan oleka mutnu-rahanu Israel ? Meman nek la edon emkade ! Amueh ' a nek de Israel duratni-waitni a ' u , yoma Abraham duratni-waitni a lia mutga Benyamin .
God did n't reject his people , whom he foreknew . Or do n't you know what the Scripture says about Elijah ? How he pleads with God against Israel , ||| Uplerlawna edonna Nhopliala mutnu-rahanu , maka Ha Nwalir nian oleka la ' a ululu memna . Ina-nara ama-hyali , mhioratreria la hya ' ed maka ha rakot targa la Puka ralamni la ' Elia , la ' lera ha naklaka Israela re la ' a Uplerlawna . Elia nakot la ,
Lord , they have killed your prophets . They have broken down your altars . I am left alone , and they seek my life . ||| Matromlawnu ne ! Riy rwen oleka makwohorulu-ktatrulmu re ! Ne rweyata-rwaniawua katri'ana maka ha ral nhioi-tniani la O ' a . Enekneka amuemueh ' a , me iriwra rwenan walia a ' u !
But how does God answer him ? I have reserved for myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to Baal . ||| Ne hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna hota Ha Nakota la Elia ? Uplerlawna Nwahla Eli lirni Niwra , Hota edon emkade ! Yoma A ' g e wualir niana riy riwnu wo'itu pua ultarga la ' Awuameh ' u . Ira edonna rru ' u-rtowar ma'ta la uplera-upmati Ba'al .
Even so too at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace . ||| Pede hota emkade walia la dodo'ondi . Uplerlawna e Nwalir dioinia Israel riy doma pa E gahani yoma la ' a E sniayanni la ira .
And if by grace , then it is no longer of works , otherwise grace is no longer grace . But if it is of works , it is no longer grace , otherwise work is no longer work . ||| Enwalir nian ira onnila sniayanni la ' ira . E ' edonna Namkek la ira hihi'ini-yapyapni . Yoma maka ha riwra sniayanni plollola de edonna namkek la riy hihi'ini-yapyapni wniehwani-liakatni .
What then ? That which Israel seeks for , that he did n't obtain , but the chosen ones obtained it , and the rest were hardened . ||| Pa hota emkameni ? Riy Israel honona edonna rlernan talan pa ror Uplerlawna rkalwieda emeknekama hya ' ed maka ha rwahakhaka , enekneka cuma Israel riy dom to ' a maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana . Mere la ' Israel mutu korni honona re Uplerlawna Nhi ' pa ra ' o'ta wat muomuou lia ' a Uplerlawna polpuollu .
According as it is written , God gave them a spirit of stupor , eyes that they should not see , and ears that they should not hear , to this very day . ||| Pa emeknekama ha rhorat targa la ' a Puka ralamni niwra , Uplerlawna Nhi ' a ira wniarorni-wnialaini pa nwal lia riy podku , ne la ululu la'pa dodo'ondi meman pa tlinni-matni ratniutwu .
David says , Let their table be made a snare , a trap , a stumbling block , and a retribution to them . ||| Daud nakot walia , Miollia pa mukni-heparnu ya'anlawna-yemunlawna re plinu-plinnianama rwal lia klierat lawna .
Let their eyes be darkened , that they may not see . Always keep their backs bent . ||| Miollia pa yamkekni re rmela-rka'ara , me mtieman targa re totpena rodia pa to'orni rkokioil nohora re pa nodi liarni .
I ask then , did they stumble that they might fall ? May it never be ! But by their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles , to provoke them to jealousy . ||| Pede hota emkameni owa'ana ? Yanpa la ' lerni la Yahudi mutnu rler la klieratni de emeknekama e rtuini-rdai pa ta'eni raprir nian owa'ana ? Mere hota edon emkade ! La ' a ir do'oni-halli maka edon rreinian Yesus Kristus de , pede hairi dom to ' mutnu-rahanu mana rreiniana Yesus Kristus de pa rlernana yamori-yalewna . Totpa hota la ' hade pede riy Yahudi mana ralamni rahniar wialia Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu la ' a Yesus Kristus maka riy mak kden la hairi dom to ' a re rlernan oleka pede Yahudi mana riwra rlernana pa rpesiay wiali .
Now if their fall is the riches of the world , and their loss the riches of the Gentiles , how much more their fullness ! ||| Yahudi atia ' a mak kden la nohkeran di de , rlernana ra'ani-pallu mak karehi-kalawna yoma Yahudi re do'oni-halli maka rwayotil oleka yamori-yalewna , onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini . Pede la'pa Yahudi honona maka Uplerlawna Nwalir tiaru rwaldioinia pa rreiniana-ra'nana Yesus Kristus totpa ror Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana , hota yeher to ' a pa Uplerlawna kalwiedni-paitiotni na'ititar rer lia nohkeran di wawannu .
For I speak to you who are Gentiles . Since then as I am an apostle to Gentiles , I glorify my ministry , ||| Mere dodo'ondi , a ' g e ultier niohora hari tiy ina-nara ama-hyali miy , miaka edonna kler wut lia riy Yahudi . A ' di de ghi ' a riy makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ' a miy maka Yahudi atia ' a , de akar toto ' memna yoma awuarora de ha samomuou eda kniar di .
if by any means I may provoke to jealousy those who are my flesh , and may save some of them . ||| Agha'ar reria a arnu totpena la a knia'ru di ed maka karieiniande a mutwua'lu Yahudi re orgahi ralamni rahniar wal lia ra ' a-palu maka Yahudi atia ' a miy mliernana , totpena la talan de Uplerlawna Namori-nalewan nan ira .
For if the rejection of them is the reconciling of the world , what would their acceptance be , but life from the dead ? ||| La'pa Uplerlawna Nwayotlia Yahudi re nareiniande Nharia loi-talla la hairi-hairi dom to ' a miy pa mior Uplerlawna mpiali owa'an la kalwiedni . Yaho'ma la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nreinian olek Yahudi re onnila ir pesiayni de . Hota hade emekwalima riy mak kmati rmori owa'ana !
If the first fruit is holy , so is the lump . If the root is holy , so are the branches . ||| Ne Abraham , Isak me Yakopa de Uplerlawna gahani ira , pede hota emkade walia , ir duratni-waitni mana , Uplerlawna gahani walia ira . Itala yamanna pa tawalliohor teka contoh . Nhi'inde la'pa Yahudi re rala prehenni yanullu la Uplerlawna , de hota nnia'eratni de prehenni korni mana Uplerlawna gahani walia . Hota hade emekwalima ora-au id wali . De la'pa au ga'ar de ha samoga de , de hota onni tutnu-akni mana samou walia de .
But if some of the branches were broken off , and you , being a wild olive , were grafted in among them and became partaker with them of the root and of the richness of the olive tree , ||| Hota tawalliohora riy Yahudi la ' a Saitun tutnu-akni maka rhamin doin la au Saitun ida . Ne Yahudi atia ' miy re emolmolan nekama Saitun akni maka rhamin doinia la wo'ora-kawru pa rma rtapla la ' a nhiamin gen die , la ' a Saitun tutnu-akni mulaliaini de letgarni . Pa hota emolmolan nekama tutnu-akni maka rhamin doin la de nlernana ruri-lai la au Saitun de , de hota miy mliernan walia ra ' a-palu yoma Uplerlawna nnio'oni la Yahudi re upni-tgarni .
do n't boast over the branches . But if you boast , remember that it is not you who support the root , but the root supports you . ||| La ' hade pede yan memmemna mpiarwah ' a nana riy Yahudi maka Uplerlawna Nwayotlia , la'pa emkameni la ir de emekwalima Saitun akni maka ha rhamin dodioinia . Mere la'pa mimiwra mrian inonmi la Yahudi re , mhioratreria ! Miy di de emeknekama ha ak tio ' a miy . Ne au aki ho'mana hota edonna nalla ga'arni na'ana , mere ga'ar de ed mak kalla ha'akni de na'ana .
You will say then , Branches were broken off , that I might be grafted in . ||| Mere yanpa hota riy Yahudi atia ' id tiy miy die mpiahla li'ru miwra , Yowa , mere Yahudi re hota emeknekama au tutnu-akni maka ha rhamin doinia re totpena ha rtapla ha'aki id owa'ana la au die . Ne a ' die hota emeknekama ha'aki maka ha rtapal walia la au onni de .
True , by their unbelief they were broken off , and you stand by your faith . Do n't be conceited , but fear , ||| Hade plola . Mere mhioratreria me ! Rhopliala Yahudi re yoma rakleh pesiay . Ne rreinian targho ' miy , yoma la ' a pesiaymi . La ' hade pede yana yehwami natulu-napetan la Yahudi re . Mere mhi ' yehwami de mliol yawa , me mimta'ata mhiopliala miy pesiaymi .
for if God did n't spare the natural branches , neither will he spare you . ||| Yoma la'pa Uplerlawna Nakleha sniayanni la ' a riy Yahudi mak kakleha pesiay , pa Nhopliala pa emeknekama rhopliala au tiutu-aki la mulaliaini de , de hota Enhoplial wali miy yoma mikleha pesiay .
See then the goodness and severity of God . Toward those who fell , severity , but toward you , goodness , if you continue in his goodness , otherwise you also will be cut off . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , itatga de Uplerlawna kalwiedni de inpona . Mere hankeranni lawan walia . Entutg hankeranni la Yahudi maka edon kpesiay . Mere Entutga ralam kalwiedni la Yahudi atia ' miy maka kden rer lia E kalwiedni . Mere la'pa miy edonan mdien rer lia pesiaymi , de miy miana hota rhoplial wal miy .
They also , if they do n't continue in their unbelief , will be grafted in , for God is able to graft them in again . ||| Ne la'pa riy Yahudi re ir rolin doinia nhiolli-lietni la ' a kleh pesiayni re , de hota Uplerlawna Nreinian owa'an ira , yoma Uplerlawna ed maka kodi plolli pa Nreinian owa'ana re .
For if you were cut out of that which is by nature a wild olive tree , and were grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree , how much more will these , which are the natural branches , be grafted into their own olive tree ? ||| Yoma makden Yahudi atia ' a miy emekwalima hatutu-ha'aki maka ha rhamin doini la au Saitun mak kdella wo'ora , maka edon rtera , mere emkade ho'mana rtapal wutga la au Saitun maka ha rterter reria emolmolan walia makden Yahudi , de Israel duratni-waitni re . La'pa Uplerlawna Nreinian Yahudi atia ' a miy onnila miy pesiaymi de , hota yeher to ' a pa Enreiniana-na'nana owa'an Yahudi re onnila ir pesiayni . Yoma ir er maka Uplerlawna Ntera-nlahu , me ir er maka Uplerlawna Nakot targ ulu oleka E nnio'oni la .
For I do n't desire you to be ignorant , brothers , of this mystery , so that you wo n't be wise in your own conceits , that a partial hardening has happened to Israel , until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali maka Yahudi atia ' miy , a'ukot nohora tiy miy die la ' a Uplerlawna ralma-riorni maka ululu de riy raplin niohora ma'ta , totpena la lera-mela ri , de miat niohora memna . A'ukot nohora hadi yoma a'uhmena miy mrian atulu inonmi . De hota Uplerlawna wniarorni de emkadi , Israel duratni-waitni harahu re ra ' o'ta tehra . Mere wniehwani re hota nodi liarni la'pa ntut lia ler meni maka Yahudi atia ' a honona maka Uplerlawna Npolga oleka re hota rpesiaya E ' a .
and so all Israel will be saved . Even as it is written , There will come out of Zion the Deliverer , and he will turn away ungodliness from Jacob . ||| Nhor nioka Israel duratni-waitni honona hota rlernana yamori-yalewna . Pa hota emeknekama ha rhorat targa la ' a Puka ralamni de e riwra , Hota Ray Makamori-Kalewna Nwatiawua Sion pa Nmai . Hota Nmai pia Nrei dioinia do ' a-hala la ' a Yakop duratni-waitni .
This is my covenant with them , when I will take away their sins . ||| Hota A nnio ' u maka A'ukot targa la ' ir de , totpa A ' g ed maka khap doinia ir la do'oni-halli .
Concerning the Good News , they are enemies for your sake . But concerning the election , they are beloved for the fathers ' sake . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali makden Yahudi atia ' a miy , la'pa rakot nohora la ' a riy Yahudi edonna rreiniana-ra'nana Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna , de hota Yahudi re emekwalima Uplerlawna arwalli . Mere la ' ir edon rreiniana de , hade nareiniande mimliernan unut lawna yoma la ' hade pede miy er maka mliernana yamori-yalewna . Mere la'pa rakot nohora Yahudi emeka riy maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana de , Uplerlawna Nhi ' kalwiedwed ma'ta la riy Yahudi re , yoma Uplerlawna Nhorat nan ma'ta E nnio'oni la ' a ira upni-tgarni Abraham , Isak me Yakopa .
For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable . ||| Yoma la'pa Uplerlawna Nwaliria riy ne Nala ra'ani-pallu la riy de , hota Uplerlawna edonna Nwali owa'an lirni pa Nherun doinia hya ' maka Ha Nhi ' olek de .
For as you in time past were disobedient to God , but now have obtained mercy by their disobedience , ||| Ler ululu de Yahudi atia ' miy edonna mitlina-mitaili la ' a Uplerlawna , mere la ' dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna orgahani Ntutga ralam kalwiedni tiy miy , yoma la ' a riy Yahudi edonna ratlina-ratailla E ' a .
even so these also have now been disobedient , that by the mercy shown to you they may also obtain mercy . ||| Emkade walia la dodo'ondi de Yahudi re rlernan walia Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni onnila Yahudi atia ' miy . Yoma ir edon ratlina-ratailla Uplerlawna nareiniande Uplerlawna Ntutga ralam kalwiedni la ' a Yahudi atia ' miy . Ne onnila miy owa'an pede Yahudi re rlernan walia Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni .
For God has bound all to disobedience , that he might have mercy on all . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nhur dioinia rimormiori honona rpa ratlinnon kerna yoma do ' a-hala nodi plolli la ira . La ' hade pede Enlernan talan pa Entutga sniayanni la riy honona .
Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God ! How unsearchable are his judgments , and his ways past tracing out ! ||| Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , O ' ed mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni ! O kirkirmu-ralma-riormu wniatetmu-wnianehemu narehi-nalawan memna . Ralma-riormu ta'en niana amparor nana . Hota he ' ed maka kakot nohora lira-tun muaka Ompuetla ? Me he ' wal pia mak kna'erit nana la ' a hya ' maka Mhi ' nan oleka rena ?
For who has known the mind of the Lord ? Or who has been his counselor ? ||| Hota emeknekama ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni riwra , He ' ed maka kat niohora Orgahi-Orha ' a ralma-riorni ? He ' ed maka hota kano ' a-kanatga E ' a ?
Or who has first given to him , and it will be repaid to him again ? ||| He ' ed mak kara ' a hadom la Orgahi-Orha ' a ? Pede nwahaka wniahlani ? Riy hadamonan meman la !
For of him and through him and to him are all things . To him be the glory for ever ! Amen . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kakoki-kayapi hare honona . E ' ed mak kodi plolli la hare honona , me Enakoki-nayapi hare honona pa nodia ya'uli-yawedi la E ' a . Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , mai pia ta'uli-tawedi tamuki-tahepur la Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
Therefore I urge you , brothers , by the mercies of God , to present your bodies a living sacrifice , holy , acceptable to God , which is your spiritual service . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' a Uplerlawna kalwiedni mai ita pede awuak de , totpena miala inonmi la Uplerlawna , de mhi ' inonmi de pa emeknekama hoihoi-tantiani , mak kmormiori , maka miala la Uplerlawna gahani , me mak kodia ralam kalwieda la E ' a . Maka a'ukot di kniola tieru-niawur nehla yala'ani mak plollolli memna la Uplerlawna de .
Do n't be conformed to this world , but be transformed by the renewing of your mind , so that you may prove what is the good , well-pleasing , and perfect will of God . ||| Yana mliernohora rimormiori nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini . Mere miollia pa Uplerlawna Nhi ' pa wniarora warwuaru na nherun doinia la wniaror ululmi de totpa hota la ' hade pede miy miat niohor memna Uplerlawna ralma-riorni mak kodia kalwiedni me nden rer lia plol wawna . Mak klernohora E ralma-riorni de , hihi'ini re rla ' nana E ralamni .
For I say through the grace that was given me , to everyone who is among you , not to think of yourself more highly than you ought to think , but to think reasonably , as God has apportioned to each person a measure of faith . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Uplerlawna ed mak kala sniayanni la ' mai a ' pua A ' g ed mak kodi E lirni . La ' hade pede a'uno ' a-unat miy hononmi pa yana mitulu-mipetna inonmi . Mere mimpiaror nohora inon wamuehemi de lol talanni , nlernohora ra ' a-palu miaka Uplerlawna Nal tiy miy onnila mpiesiay E ' a .
For even as we have many members in one body , and all the members do n't have the same function , ||| It inonni de lima-laka erla . La'pa ita tutu'uni-niernierannu nek de erla . Ne ita limni-lakni la'pa it tutu'uni-niernierannu re kniarni harahu , mere edonna ramneha .
so we , who are many , are one body in Christ , and individually members of one another , ||| Hota emkade wal lia mak kpesiay . Riy rahu ita , mere emkade ho'mana emeknekama it di de inona ida yoma it hononit tor Yesus Kristus tla ' ida . Me it idma ntulan la ida pa emekwalima it limni-lakni tutu'uni-niernierannu la inona ida .
having gifts differing according to the grace that was given to us , if prophecy , let 's prophesy according to the proportion of our faith , ||| Onnila it di de rima-rima tlernana ra ' a-palu karunia maka Uplerlawna Nala mai ita , de Nlernohora E sniayanni , de hota itnairia pa ta tulan la it rimormior wialli . Ra ' a-palu honona re edon ramneha . Riy maka klernan ra ' a-palu pa nakot nohora kot mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna , de hota nakot nohora hade , de nlernohor neka lira maka ha npesiaya de Uplerlawna Nal oleka la e wa .
or service , let 's give ourselves to service , or he who teaches , to his teaching , ||| Riy maka klernan ra ' a-palu pa na nhima-nre ' a la rimormior wialli , de hota nhima-nre ' a toto ' meman la rimormior wialli . Riy maka klernan ra ' a-palu pia nwatutu-nwaye ' a , de riy de nape'el pa nwatutu wali .
or he who exhorts , to his exhorting , he who gives , let him do it with generosity , he who rules , with diligence , he who shows mercy , with cheerfulness . ||| Riy maka klernan ra ' a-palu pa nhedu-ntehra rimormior wialli , de nape'el pa nhi ' emkade . Riy maka klernan ra ' a-palu pia nara ' a-napalga rimormior wialli , de nhi ' emkade , de ntutga ralam kalwiedni . Riy maka klernana ra ' a-palu pa ra rtorna-rrautu , de napepe'ela pa ntorna-nrautu rimormior walli . Riy maka klernana ra ' a-palu pia ntulla-nsayni la rimormior wialli , de ntulan la rimormior wialli de , nala ihru ploi-ralma ple'era nahepuepur nohora .
Let love be without hypocrisy . Abhor that which is evil . Cling to that which is good . ||| Miala ihru ploi-ralma ple'era pa ma mtiulla-msiayni , mira ' a-mipalga rimormior wialmi . Mhiopliala kirkir yata-ralma rior yata , ilu-yehwa yatyata-halala , mere mtiorrer apitga kalwiedni-paitiotni .
In love of the brothers be tenderly affectionate to one another , in honor prefer one another , ||| Mihmiakur pa mtiutga kalwieda-paitiota la ' a mutwualmi re pa hota emeka mior ir pa mpia'ama-mpiahyali mpia'ina-mpianara . Me mipepe'el pa idma nhu'ru-nhelam la ida .
not lagging in diligence , fervent in spirit , serving the Lord , ||| Mkiar lia Orgahi-Orha ' a kniarni de mipepe'ela . Yana miodia inon werta pa ma mkiari .
rejoicing in hope , enduring in troubles , continuing steadfastly in prayer , ||| Mihepuepru yoma mhia'ar reri aranmi la Orgahi-Orha ' a , la'pa mlier la kropan lawna onde lui-nuhru mhiur niohora ralam mehrami me mdien rer lia sniumbaini .
contributing to the needs of the saints , and given to hospitality . ||| Mtiulan la makpesiay walmi mak kakleha-kaplara . Ne mrieiniana-mia'nana do'ona-dakna mak kwatiawua gen dom to ' a la ' a miy likatmi ralamni .
Bless those who persecute you , bless , and do n't curse . ||| Mpiak la Orgahi-Orha ' a totpena E ' ed maka ktera-kdema riy mak kodi miy lia lui-nuhru . Yana mpiak la Uplerlawna pa rlernana miy nhiorghalmi-wniaghalmi .
Rejoice with those who rejoice . Weep with those who weep . ||| Mihepur nohora riy maka kler la muki-hepru , me mrie'ela mkiakur nohor walia riy mak ko ' a-kakru .
Be of the same mind one toward another . Do n't set your mind on high things , but associate with the humble . Do n't be wise in your own conceits . ||| Miora rimormior wialmi re idma nkalwieda-npaitiot ida . Yan memmemna mtiutga tulmi-petanmi . Mere hota miora riy mak kakleh weli de mpiahaur wutu . Yan memmemna mpiar rer lia lirmi-yatmi pa mtiern rira .
Repay no one evil for evil . Respect what is honorable in the sight of all men . ||| La'pa mliernana riy rhi ' yatyatni la miy , de yana mpiahla nohora hya ' ed maka ha nhi'de . Miala samomuounu pa ma mpiahla . La hya ' honona maka ha mhi ' nan de , mhi ' reria totpena riy honona ramkek nana de miy die rimormiori samomuou miy .
If it is possible , as much as it is up to you , be at peace with all men . ||| Mipepe'el memna totpa yan miora riy dom miwunu-miwenna .
Do n't seek revenge yourselves , beloved , but give place to God 's wrath . For it is written , Vengeance belongs to me , I will repay , says the Lord . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden rer lia a ralmu , yan memmemna mpiahla rira nhiolli-lietni mak kpa'eini-kpahala . Mere mial neka la Uplerlawna pen neka E ' ed maka Nukmua re ! Yoma la ' a Puka lirni de e rhorat targa la Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni Niwra , A ' g ed mak kwahla ! A ' g ed mak hota gukmua re ! Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni hade !
Therefore If your enemy is hungry , feed him . If he is thirsty , give him a drink , for in doing so , you will heap coals of fire on his head . ||| Mere hota mliernohora Puka lirni mak kiwra , La'pa o ' arwalmu naplara , de muala na'ana , ne tiernu kerna , de mual ger la nemnu yoma la'pa miy mhi ' emkade , de hota e ' ed maka kmola-kma ' a pa nherun doin hihi'ini-yapyapni .
Do n't be overcome by evil , but overcome evil with good . ||| Pede yan memmemna miala yatyatni ma mpiahla rira hihi'ini yatyatni la ' miy , yoma la'pa emkade de nnia'eratni de rira nhiolli-liet yatyatni ratowar nan olek miy . Mere miatu miala samomuounu pa ma mpiahla . Emkade pede hota mitowar nan ira nhiolli-liet yatyatni de .
Let every soul be in subjection to the higher authorities , for there is no authority except from God , and those who exist are ordained by God . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , it hononita de hota tatu tsu'ru-tselam la lodna-hairi nayanni . Yoma lodna-hairi honona re rlernana tniorna-riautu rella Uplerlawna limni ralamni , ne la ' a lodna-hairi dodo'on gahani ri , e rala ' nohora tnioranni-riautnu de ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna .
Therefore he who resists the authority withstands the ordinance of God , and those who withstand will receive to themselves judgment . ||| La ' hade pede he ' ed mak katlinnon keran la lodna-hairi yawewalli , de emekwalima enatlinnon keran la Uplerlawna yawewalli . Ne ir hihi'ini mak emkare nareiniande hota irlernana niukmu .
For rulers are not a terror to the good work , but to the evil . Do you desire to have no fear of the authority ? Do that which is good , and you will have praise from the authority , ||| Yoma riy maka katu khu'ru-khelam la lodna-hairi yawewalli de hota edonna namta'ata hadomdoma la ' a lodna-hairi . La ' to ' a riy maka khal nohora lodna-hairi yawewalli nanpena namta'ata . Pa la'pa miy miwra mhi ' totpena yana mimta'ata mak ktorna lodna-hairi , de yana mpiera-mdiaitia lodna-hairi riorni-liaini . Ne hota la'pa emkade , de hota mliernana ya'uli la ' a mak ktorna lodna-hair de .
for he is a servant of God to you for good . But if you do that which is evil , be afraid , for he does n't bear the sword in vain , for he is a servant of God , an avenger for wrath to him who does evil . ||| Yoma maktorna-makrautu re de Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a hopopanni hare , pa rkaria kalwiedwed tiy miy . Mere la'pa miy mhi ' yatyatni-halalli , de hota plola pa mimta'at ira . Yoma ira rlernohora ira tnioranni-riautnu pa rukum miy . Ir de Uplerlawna hopopanni ira maka ketlia niukmu maka Uplerlawna Nala la ' a he ' a-he ' mak khi ' hala .
Therefore you need to be in subjection , not only because of the wrath , but also for conscience ' sake . ||| Hade pede miatu mitlina-mitailla lodna-hairi yawewalli , de edon riwra mhi ' a to ' a yoma mihmena mliernan niukmu , mere la ' walia yoma miat niohor oleka de hihi ' a-yapyap die , ed mak kaplollol memna .
For this reason you also pay taxes , for they are servants of God 's service , continually doing this very thing . ||| La ' hade wal miana ed mak karei piede mpiairi blastena . Yoma maktorna-makrautu re er maka kala ' a nohora Uplerlawna tulanni-kniarni de .
Therefore give everyone what you owe , if you owe taxes , pay taxes , if customs , then customs , if respect , then respect , if honor , then honor . ||| Pede miala la maktorna-makrautu maka plollola pa miala re , de hota mpiairi blastena la lodna-hairi , hya ' to ' a maka ha rakot oleka tiy miy wia , de yana mhi ' a tlinnon kerna , me miatu mitota-miwawa , mhiu'ru-mhielam la ' mak kala ' nohora horta-hairi maka lodna-hairi ha nakota .
Owe no one anything , except to love one another , for he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law . ||| La'pa mhi ' a otna-ar la riy ida , de pleta-pleta pa mhierun momuoga re . Id wal die mhi ' a pa nodi liarni , de totpena miy idma ntutga ralam kalwiedwedni la ida pa nodi liarni . Yoma riy maka ksaynia rimormior wialli , de hota e nhi ' nan olek Musa deullu-tatarni honona .
For the commandments , You shall not commit adultery , You shall not murder , You shall not steal , You shall not covet , and whatever other commandments there are , are all summed up in this saying , namely , You shall love your neighbor as yourself . ||| Yoma la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni niwra , Yana milira-miliai , yana mpiunu-mpienna , yana mkiamnelu-mkiamna ' a , yana ralammi niwra gahami emekwalima rira gahani . Deulu-tatra wogata re la'pa deulu-tatra honona de er momuou lia deulu-tatra mak kiwra , Mtiulla-msiayni , mura ' a-mupal wualia rimormiori wialmu pa emekwalima mumkek reria inon wamuehemu .
Love does n't harm a neighbor . Love therefore is the fulfillment of the law . ||| Yoma riy mak ktulla-ksayni , kara ' a-kapalga riy meheni , de hota hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kodia yatyatni id mana , hota edonna nhi ' a la riy meheni de . Pede la'pa itlernana riy maka ksaynia rimormior wialli de hota riy de wal pia ed maka klernohor oleka agama deullu-tatarni honona .
Do this , knowing the time , that it is already time for you to awaken out of sleep , for salvation is now nearer to us than when we first believed . The night is far gone , and the day is near . Let 's therefore throw off the deeds of darkness , and let 's put on the armor of light . ||| Pede mtiulla-msiayni , mira ' a-mipalga rimormiori wialmi , yoma miy e mhioratreria lera-mela meni hari . La ' a ler maka na'nama itpesiaya de rlardoin memn olekwa . Ler maka hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nmai pia Nalewn ita de e rrehgorg olekwa . Ntutu-nte ' olek meman la ' ler maka twehwa-tlakat la plollol wawannu . Hota emeknekama la'pa mela nhi ' pa nrepar wa de riy ramat la dudu ralamni , de hota emkade walia la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a maimiaini rehgoru olekwa pede yana itsi ' a nhioli-lieta melmelli gahani . Hota itwehwa-tlakat la leler gahani de emeknekama keki-rautu maka it tnairia .
Let 's walk properly , as in the day , not in reveling and drunkenness , not in sexual promiscuity and lustful acts , and not in strife and jealousy . ||| Hota tsi ' a-tyapia lelera gahani de emkadille , yanpa la'pa itsi ' ya'anlawna-yemunlawna de nodi it la pehera-ma'wu pa taplinu todi it inonni pa it idma nalira-naliai ida , onde twehwa yatyatni-halalli . Yana tahuri-tawo'ora , yana it idma nahmena namkek ida kalwiedni .
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ , and make no provision for the flesh , for its lusts . ||| Mere tlernohor neka Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni , nhiolli-lietni . Ne hota hihi'ini-yapyapni , nhiolli-lietni de , emeknekama keki-rautu ar ralma maka it tnairia . Ne yan memmemna tlernohora ita yehwa rimormiorni mak kod it la do ' a-hala , yoma itwaror nan hya ' la ' it ralamni de itiwra tsi ' memna .
Now accept one who is weak in faith , but not for disputes over opinions . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' riy makpesiay mak kaplinu-kaplo ' a la ' a wniaror samomuou hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nwayow nohora , de miatu mrieiniana-mia'nana samomuoga . Yana miora mihuri-miwo'or nohora hya ' mak kpa'eini-kpahala la Uplerlawna yoma riy de enwaror nan hade la e ihranu ralamni .
One man has faith to eat all things , but he who is weak eats only vegetables . ||| Mimkek nohor tek la ! Riy makpesiay dom de wniarorni niwra na'an hya'-hya ' to ' a . Mere la riy doma de enaplin niohor ma'ta hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nwayow nohora pa niwra e ' de enekneka ena'an to ' a ortawi-autiawi .
Do n't let him who eats despise him who does n't eat . Do n't let him who does n't eat judge him who eats , for God has accepted him . ||| Riy maka ka'ana hya ' to ' a , de yana nparwah ' a nana riy mak ka'ana ortawi-autiawi . Ne la ' walia mak ka'ana eneknek ortawi-autiawi to ' a de yana nwaghal walia mak ka'ana haneknek wawannu . Yoma riy de ed maka Uplerlawna Nreinian oleka walia .
Who are you who judge another 's servant ? To his own lord he stands or falls . Yes , he will be made to stand , for God has power to make him stand . ||| Ta'en niana riy ida netlia riy dom to ' a hopopanni de plolli-halli , yoma hopopan de tlinni-tailli npa'eini-npahala ho'mana pen neka upni-matromni nmeh ' a neka ed mak ketlia . Emkade walia Orgahi-Orha ' a Nla ' oleka makpesiay wialmi upni-matromni . Hota E ' ed mak ketlia makpesiay wialmi lirni-tunnu . Hota Ntulan la hopopanni de totpena hihi'ini re rla ' nana Orgahi-Orha ' a ralamni .
One man esteems one day as more important . Another esteems every day alike . Let each man be fully assured in his own mind . ||| La ' riy dom de wniarorni de riwra , Ler memeh ' a di , de narehelia lera korni , mere dom de riwra , Lera re honona ramneneha la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Mere mak kaplola de , de totpa rima-rima nlernohora hya ' ed maka ha nwarora de plola la Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , de edonna nlernohora riy dom to ' a mak ktot nan e ' a pa e nlernohora ir wniaror wamueheni .
He who observes the day , observes it to the Lord , and he who does not observe the day , to the Lord he does not observe it . He who eats , eats to the Lord , for he gives God thanks . He who does n't eat , to the Lord he does n't eat , and gives God thanks . ||| Riy maka kwaliri-kwalioha lera maka ha napili-nahniari de , enhi ' emkade totpena na napilia-nahniaria Orgahi-Orha ' a la ' ler de . Riy maka ka'ana-kemnia haneknek wawannu mana ha nhi ' emkade totpena na napili-nahniaria Orgahi-Orha ' a wali , yoma ena'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna la ' ya'ana-yemun de . Emkade walia maka ka'ana-kemni ortawi-autiawi , nhi ' emkade totpena e ' mana nhu'ru-nhelam palia Orgahi-Orha ' a me nsumbain pa na'uli-nawedia E ' a la ' ortawi-autiawi re .
For none of us lives to himself , and none dies to himself . ||| Itsi ' emkade yoma riy id mana edonna nmormior pia nlernohora e ralma-rior wamueheni . Me riy id la mai it mana edonna nmat die nlernohora E ralma-rior wamueheni .
For if we live , we live to the Lord . Or if we die , we die to the Lord . If therefore we live or die , we are the Lord 's . ||| Yoma itmormiori la'pa ita tmati ho'mana hade nlernohora Orgahi-Orha ' a ralma-riorni . La ' hade pede Orgahi-Orha ' a gahani ita , la'pa tmormiori onde tmati oleka wa .
For to this end Christ died , rose , and lived again , that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living . ||| Hade rerieini pede Yesus Kristus Nmati olekwa mere Nmori owa'ana , totpena Enla ' Matromlawanni mai ita , la'pa itmormiori ma'ta onde itmati oleka wa .
But you , why do you judge your brother ? Or you again , why do you despise your brother ? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ . ||| Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a ed mak kla ' Matromlawanni la ' makpesiay hononita , pa hota hya ' ed mak krei pia miy mak ka'an eneknek to ' a ortawi-autiawi , de miy e mpiaghala mak kpesiay wialmi mak ka'an hya'-hya ' to ' a ? Ne hya ' ed mak krei pia miy mak mi'ina-miemun hya'-hya ' to ' de miy e mpiarwah ' a nana mak edon ka'ana ? It hononit di de hota ittutrier lia Uplerlawna gaini ralamni pa Enmeh ' a maka Nhud it la watghudi lokarni .
For it is written , ‘ As I live , ' says the Lord , ‘ to me every knee will bow . Every tongue will confess to God . ' ||| Hota emeknekama ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de riwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nlokar pa Niwra , Hota plol toto ' memna de riy honona rru ' u-rtowar la A ga'yu ralamni . Ne riy honona mana namni ra'uli-rawedia A na'nu de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
So then each one of us will give account of himself to God . ||| La ' hade pede erammi la ' temni . Rima-rima natiak la hihi ' a-yapyap wamueheni yoma hota mpialol nohora la ' a Uplerlawna .
Therefore let 's not judge one another any more , but judge this rather , that no man put a stumbling block in his brother 's way , or an occasion for falling . ||| La ' hade pede yan memmemna idma nwaghal owa'an ida . Ne mitiak rer wiali totpa wniehwami-liakatmi yana nhi ' pa makpesiay wialmi rler la do ' a-hala ralamni .
I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean of itself , except that to him who considers anything to be unclean , to him it is unclean . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yoma agor oleka Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus mla ' lir id wa pa apuesiay memna , de yamanna hya ' to ' a mana edonna nwal lia mak Uplerlawna Nlarna . Mere la'pa riy ida wniarorni-wnialaini de yamanan de Uplerlawna Nlarna , la ' e ' de plol toto ' a pa yamanan de e rlarna .
Yet if because of food your brother is grieved , you walk no longer in love . Do n't destroy with your food him for whom Christ died . ||| Ne la'pa mi'in hadoma pa inmi-narmi mak pesiay ramkek nana , pa hota pesiayni re wolwo'la yoma la ' ir wniarorni de ra'an yamanan de do ' a-hala hade , de mi'in yamanan de miy edon mtiutga ralam kalwieda la ' ira . Pede yan memmemna mi'ina-miemun neka hadomdoma la makpesiay gaini , la'pa mi'in emkade la ' ir gaini hota nodia ir la klieratni . Yoma Yesus Kristus mana Nmati olekwa la ir rerieini .
Then do n't let your good be slandered , ||| La ' hade pede la'pa miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi de hota narieiniande makpesiay wialmi pesiayni wolwo'la , kennama la miy wniarormi de hihi'imi de edon nhala la Uplerlawna yamkekni , samounu de yana mhi ' hihi'-yapyap die totpa yan riy rwaghal yehwami de .
for God 's Kingdom is not eating and drinking , but righteousness , peace , and joy in the Holy Spirit . ||| Yoma la'pa Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa emeka Ray la ' it mormiorni-dardiarni , de Uplerlawna Nwahaka de hornama itsoli-tliet la plol wawna . Me totpa idma nkalwied la ' ida me itamuki-tahepru yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni mak kdella it ralamni . Ne hota hya ' ed maka ha ta'ana-temnia , de edonna rakot nohora de .
For he who serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God and approved by men . ||| Riy maka klernohora Yesus Kristus mak ktutga nhioli mak emkadi , de hota Uplerlawna ralamni nala de . Ne rimormior wiali miana ralamni nal walia .
So then , let 's follow after things which make for peace , and things by which we may build one another up . ||| La ' hade pede itwahak neka pa totpena yana idma napie'er la ida , me totpena idma naruri-nalai nian id pesiayni .
Do n't overthrow God 's work for food 's sake . All things indeed are clean , however it is evil for that man who creates a stumbling block by eating . ||| Yanpa la ' ya'ana to ' nekane mpieyata-mpianiaga hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nkar niana la riy mak kpesiay die ihranu ralamni . Meman nek la ya'ana-yemnu honona de Uplerlawna edonna Nlarna . Mere la'pa mi'in hadoma de hota narieiniande riy makpesiay dom ra'an walia pa hota la wniarorni de enhi ' nan oleka do ' a-hala , de hota mi'in hade de nhala .
It is good to not eat meat , drink wine , nor do anything by which your brother stumbles , is offended , or is made weak . ||| Samounu de yana ta'ana hamormiori ihini me temni anggur onde hya ' to ' a ed maka ha tiwra tsi ' momuowua la'pa itsi ' emkade hota nodi it makpesiay wialli de pa rler la do ' a-hala ralamni .
Do you have faith ? Have it to yourself before God . Happy is he who does n't judge himself in that which he approves . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , ndella pa Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka ed mak kat niohora miy wniarormi-wnialaimi la'pa hya ' mak kaplol me nhala . Ne hota riy maka wniarorni de nden rer lia plollolli de hota enla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni , yoma enlernohor neka hya ' ed maka ha nwarora de naplola la Uplerlawna yamkekni pa hota e edonna nwaghal inon wamueheni .
But he who doubts is condemned if he eats , because it is n't of faith , and whatever is not of faith is sin . ||| Mere riy maka kwaror nana , La'pa a'una hade , de hota aghi ' oleka do ' a-hala . Mere nwaror emkade ho'mana hota na'an yamanan de , de hota Uplerlawna ed maka kwaghala de . Yoma la'pa riy de na'an yamanan de edonna ntikil rer lia e pesiayni onnila na'an yamanan de edon nhala . Yoma hya'-hya ' maka itsi ' a-ityapia de itpesiaya de hihi ' a-yapyap die nhala Uplerlawna yamkekni , de hota it hihi'ini-yapyapni de do ' a-hala hade .
Now we who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the weak , and not to please ourselves . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' it maka katu kwarora-kwalai samomuou la hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nwayow nohora , de yana itwaghala riy mak rlarna ya'ana-yemnu yoma raplinu-raplo ' nohor ma'ta mak kaplola me mak khala . Mere miod niohor ira . Yana itlernohora ita ralma-rior wamueheni pa itot nan to ' a hya ' ed maka itwarora la it ralamni .
Let each one of us please his neighbor for that which is good , to be building him up . ||| Mere rima-rima nwahak inni-narni makpesiaya re kalwiedni , totpena ir pesiayni na'ititar rer lia .
For even Christ did n't please himself . But , as it is written , The reproaches of those who reproached you fell on me . ||| Yoma Yesus Kristus mana edonna Nwaror to ' a E inon wamueheni . Yesus lirni la Uplerlawna maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de Niwra , Yapolu-yaliella maka ha rakota tiy O ' de ha ntuin mai A ' u .
For whatever things were written before were written for our learning , that through perseverance and through encouragement of the Scriptures we might have hope . ||| Mak ha rakot targa la Puka ralamni honona de ral harella re rwatutg ita . Totpena la ' a wniatutu-wniaye ' a maka itlernana la Puka ralamni de hota itatu ta ttahan it ralamni me yeher to ' a pa it pesiayni la ' a ga ' a , pa hota itsa'ar reri it aranni la Uplerlawna de hota Ha Nhi ' nan hya ' ed maka Ha Nakot targa oleka wa .
Now the God of perseverance and of encouragement grant you to be of the same mind with one another according to Christ Jesus , ||| Uplerlawna ed mak katehra it ralamni me Nhi ' aruri-alai ita totpena it pesiayni la ' ga ' a . Twak la E ' a pa Entulan tiy miy totpa miy hononmi miatu mmiormior la ' a ihru ida-ralm ida pa emeknekama Kristus Yesus .
that with one accord you may with one mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Totpa hota mlia ralm id la ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , de Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Amlawanni de .
Therefore accept one another , even as Christ also accepted you , to the glory of God . ||| La ' hade pede , idma nreinian id la ralam kalwieda , pa hota emekwalima Yesus Kristus Nreinian olek miy die . Totpa hota la ' hade pede miodi ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna .
Now I say that Christ has been made a servant of the circumcision for the truth of God , that he might confirm the promises given to the fathers , ||| Yana mhioratdoinia de , Yesus Kristus Nmai totpa la ' hya ' ed maka Ha Nhi ' nana la Yahudi re rerieini de Ntutga de Uplerlawna Nhoratreria nnio'oni la ir upni-tgarni , Abraham , Isak , me Yakopa .
and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy . As it is written , Therefore I will give praise to you among the Gentiles and sing to your name . ||| Ne Yesus hihi'ini de wal pia nhi ' a Yahudi atia ' re pa ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna yoma Entutga ralam kalwiedni la ' ira . Hade ed maka Daud Nror targa . Ne Daud lirni la Uplerlawna de ha rhorat targa la ' a Puka ralamni de niwra , La ' hade pede hota la'pa agetla la ' a hairi-hairi maka Yahudi atia ' a letgarni hota awuatunu-wuahniara pa a ' u'uli-uwedi , lilili-mamuau O nanmu totpa ratlin nana .
Again he says , Rejoice , you Gentiles , with his people . ||| Erhorat targa de emkadi wali , Makden la hairi-hairi Yahudi atia ' miy hononmi , hota miora Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu Yahudi mimuki-mihepur nohora Uplerlawna .
Again , Praise the Lord , all you Gentiles ! Let all the peoples praise him . ||| Me hadi wali , Yahudi atia ' miy hononmi mpiatunu-mpiahniara pa mi'uli-miwedi mlilili-mmamuawua Orgahi-Orha ' a !
Again , Isaiah says , There will be the root of Jesse , he who arises to rule over the Gentiles , in him the Gentiles will hope . ||| Ne hadi mana Yesaya enakot walia , Hota Isai duratni-waitni ida Nmai pia Nodi plolli la hairi-hairi Yahudi atia ' a . Ne hota ir rha'ar aranni la E ' a .
Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing , that you may abound in hope in the power of the Holy Spirit . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , awuak pa Uplerlawna , mak khi ' pa riy rha'ar aranni la E ' a , pena Nala ralam yahepepru me Nal walia kalwieda-paitiota pripanni-fa'anni la ' miy miak e mpiesiay reri E ' a . Totpena hota Uplerlawna Nhiwni plolli-mneheni nkar lia miy ihrami-ralammi pa hota yeher to'ama mhia'ar aranmi la Uplerlawna .
I myself am also persuaded about you , my brothers , that you yourselves are full of goodness , filled with all knowledge , able also to admonish others . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , agat meman nohora de miy e mhi ' mamainia kalwiedwedni . Miy die miatu hya ' maka kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni liawanni pede miy idma natu nwatutu-nwaye ' ida .
But I write the more boldly to you in part as reminding you , because of the grace that was given to me by God , ||| Mere emkade ho'mana , la ' horat di ralamni , de apuaran pia a'ukot ploloi-plele'era la ' a lira-tunu ida-woru totpa emeknekama aghi ' miy pia mpiaror nohor owa'an la hare . A ' g e ukot nohora hare honona yoma la ' a Uplerlawna sniayanni pa E ' ed mak kala kniar de la mai a ' u ,
that I should be a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles , serving as a priest of the Good News of God , that the offering up of the Gentiles might be made acceptable , sanctified by the Holy Spirit . ||| de totpena a ' g ed mak khima-kre ' a Yesus Kristus tulanni-kniarni la ' a Yahudi atia ' a rerieini , pa emeknekama awual lia imam id la ir rerieini . Yoma ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawua Uplerlawan la ira totpena la ' a irpesiaya de , a ' g ed mak karei pia ir de emeknekama hoihoi-tantiani la ' a Uplerlawna , maka E ralamni Nala me maka Nmeh ' a gahani yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni Naliri-nalioh nan ir la Uplerlawna .
I have therefore my boasting in Christ Jesus in things pertaining to God . ||| La ' hade pede , yoma agor oleka Kristus Yesus mla ' ida , pede a ralmu nahepur nohora a knia'ru di la Uplerlawna .
For I will not dare to speak of any things except those which Christ worked through me for the obedience of the Gentiles , by word and deed , ||| Apuaran pia eneknek to ' a ukot nohora la ' a hya ' ed maka Kristus Nhi ' nana la'pa e Nnair a lira-tu'nu nor wut wualia a tulla-knia'ru pa narieiniande Yahudi atia ' a re rlernohora Uplerlawna .
in the power of signs and wonders , in the power of God 's Spirit , so that from Jerusalem and around as far as to Illyricum , I have fully preached the Good News of Christ , ||| La ' a Uplerlawna Nhiwni plolli-mneheni pede aghi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini . Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a Kristus de , de a'ukot nohor olek la riy mak kden la Yerusalem , la'pa nodi liarni la makdena Ilirikum pa a knia'ru la ' hande nhorwua olekwa .
yes , making it my aim to preach the Good News , not where Christ was already named , that I might not build on another 's foundation . ||| Yoma la ' a mulaliaini la'pa dodo'ondi , a wniaro'ru de totpena ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna la ' a gen miaka riy edonna ratlin nohor ma'ta Kristus totpena la ' a a knia'ru de , de emekto'ama a ' g edon ulair nohora rira watu liar yanullu , maka rira dom to ' a limni enni .
But , as it is written , They will see , to whom no news of him came . They who have n't heard will understand . ||| Rwaldioinia de aghi ' emeknekama e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de e riwra , Totpa hota riy meni ed maka edonna katlin ma'ta kota la Uplerlawna , de hota rna'erit nana pa rat niohora !
Therefore also I was hindered these many times from coming to you , ||| Nhi'inde alia ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la gen miaka edon ratlin ma'ta , pede hade ed maka khi ' yawuhi-yawe'eta pa a ' g edonna tiy miy die .
but now , no longer having any place in these regions , and having these many years a longing to come to you , ||| Mere la dodo'ondi de a knia'ru la ' geni-tiena ri rhorg olekwa . Ne onnila wenu-wolla rahu anni-anin rahu de agiwra tiy miy die ,
whenever I travel to Spain , I will come to you . For I hope to see you on my journey , and to be helped on my way there by you , if first I may enjoy your company for a while . ||| de pena la'pa alia ' a Spanyol de hota liola miy letmi totpena a'umuki-uhepur nan oke ' a yoma agor miy . Nhor demade miy mtiulan mai a ' u totpena agodi lia'ru la Spanyol .
But now , I say , I am going to Jerusalem , serving the saints . ||| Mere la ' dodo'ondi de agiwra lia ' a la Yerusalem totpena agodia himima-rere ' a maka riwra rala la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak kden la hande .
For it has been the good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among the saints who are at Jerusalem . ||| Yoma krei mutwualli la ' a Makedonia me Akhaya , rmeh ' a ret olek la totpena rala patuini-paro'onni la ' a Yahudi mak kakleha-kaplara la Yerusalem , mak kla ' olek la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu .
Yes , it has been their good pleasure , and they are their debtors . For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things , they owe it to them also to serve them in material things . ||| Yahudi atia ' a re mak kden la Makedonia me Akhaya ralamni raplele'era retlia de hota rhi ' emkade . Hota plola la ' ira patuini-paro'onni re totpena rhima-rre ' a mak kakleha-kaplara re la ' a Yerusalem , de lol talanni . Yoma emeknekama Yahudi atia ' a re e ra'otan la Yahudi re . Yoma riy maka Yahudi atia ' a re rre ' pa rlernan oleka sniayanni maka Uplerlawna Nakottarga la Yahudi re , yoma Yahudi re rakot nohora Kot Kalwieda la ' ira pede hota emkade walia riy maka Yahudi atia ' a re wal pia rala yohya ' a hya ' to ' a la ' a riy Yahudi mak kakleha-kaplara .
When therefore I have accomplished this , and have sealed to them this fruit , I will go on by way of you to Spain . ||| Pede la'pa aghi ' ahorga a knia'ru di maka agala patuini-paro'ona maka ha rawok nana honona pa rala la mak kden la Yerusalema re , de hota agodia lia'ru la Spanyol mere liol taru miy letmi !
I know that when I come to you , I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the Good News of Christ . ||| Agat niohora de , la'pa alier teman tiy miy die , de hota a ' g e godia Yesus Kristus tniulanni-sniayanni mak karehi-kalawan de tiy miy .
Now I beg you , brothers , by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit , that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus gahani ita me Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak ktulan ita totpena it idma nara ' a-napalg ida . La ' hade pede awuak de hononmi mhi ' emekwali a pua msiumbain rer wali a lia a knia'ru di .
that I may be delivered from those who are disobedient in Judea , and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints , ||| Msiumbaini totpena Uplerlawna Nalewna a lia mak kden la Yudea mak edon kpesiay , yanpa rhi ' yatyat a ' u . Me msiumbain walia totpena a knia'ru mak hota agodia himima-rere ' a la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu la Yerusalem , de mak kden hande rreiniana-ra'nana , de ralamni ramtiertiernu .
that I may come to you in joy through the will of God , and together with you , find rest . ||| Totpena hota la ' a miy sniumbainmi emkade mai a ' u , de hota Uplerlawna Nala pa aliernan talan pa atiy miy die , agodia ralam hepuepru . Ne it rewre'wa pa it ralamni namtiertiernu me tahepru .
Now the God of peace be with you all . Amen . ||| Awuak la Uplerlawna , mak ktorreria kalwiedni-paitiotni pena Nlin reria-nmat rer miy hononmi la ' hande . Amin Plola .
I commend to you Phoebe , our sister , who is a servant of the assembly that is at Cenchreae , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , agiwra ukot nohora tiy miy lia it narni Febe nhiol samounu de . Enla ' oleka mak khima-kre ' a krei mutnu la ' a leta Kengkrea .
that you receive her in the Lord in a way worthy of the saints , and that you assist her in whatever matter she may need from you , for she herself also has been a helper of many , and of my own self . ||| La'pa entiy miy die , totpena mrieiniana-mia'nana e ' pa emeknekama Orgahi-Orha ' a rimormiorni idma nreinian ida , mliernohora hya ' mak kaplol la riy makpesiaya . Mtiulan la e ' a , pa la'pa enwak hadom de mialla . Yoma nhi'inde e ntulan la riy rahu , emekwalima nhi'inde ntulan mai a ' u wali .
Greet Prisca and Aquila , my fellow workers in Christ Jesus , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mtiulan pa mpiak walia a kalwie'du la Priskila nora Akwila , a mutwua'lu maka kar rewre ' w a lia Kristus Yesus kniarni .
who risked their own necks for my life , to whom not only I give thanks , but also all the assemblies of the Gentiles . ||| La ' a iriwra ralewn a ' u pede trema-trema ir mati . Awuak terima kasi npenpuenu-nanahala ira , ne a ' g edonna mueh ' a mere Yahudi atia ' honona mana mak kla ' oleka krei mutnu .
Greet the assembly that is in their house . Greet Epaenetus , my beloved , who is the first fruits of Achaia to Christ . ||| Mpiak walia kalwie'du la krei mutnu maka kawok tar lia Priskila nora Akwila rom wamueheni . Kalwieda la Epenetus maka kden rer lia a ralmu . E ' ed maka kala ' ul pua kpesiaya Yesus Kristus la ' a Asia .
Greet Mary , who labored much for us . ||| A kalwie'du walia Maria , mak kar tioto ' memna yoma la ' miy .
Greet Andronicus and Junia , my relatives and my fellow prisoners , who are notable among the apostles , who were also in Christ before me . ||| Mpiak walia a kalwie'du la a hairwia'lu Andronikusa me Yuniasa . La ' lera a ' g edonna puesiay mia'ta Yesus Kristus ir er maka rala ' ul pua rpesiay Yesus Kristus . Ir de de riy makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , maka riy rwetweta la ir nanni . La ' ler ululu de agor rewre'wa wali ir pa mla ' a roma nhio'la .
Greet Amplias , my beloved in the Lord . ||| A kalwie'du walia Ampliatus maka asiayn de , yoma la ' a enor a ' pua amora Itmatromlawanni mla ' id olekwa .
Greet Urbanus , our fellow worker in Christ , and Stachys , my beloved . ||| A kalwie'du walia Urbanus it mutwualli mak kar lia ita kniarni , la ' a Yesus Kristus , me la ' a Stakis mak kden rer lia a ralmu .
Greet Apelles , the approved in Christ . Greet those who are of the household of Aristobulus . ||| A kalwie'du walia Apeles . Enler la kropna-krieutu lui-nuhru la pesiayni rerieini mere endenrer setia mamain la Yesus Kristus . Kalwieda walia Aristobulus romni mniotni honona makpesiay .
Greet Herodion , my kinsman . Greet them of the household of Narcissus , who are in the Lord . ||| Ne la ' walia a hairwia'lu Herodiona . A kalwie'du walia la ina-nara ama-hyali maka it pesiayni ida mak kden la Narkisusa romni .
Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa , who labor in the Lord . Greet Persis , the beloved , who labored much in the Lord . ||| A kalwie'du la it narni Trifena nora Trifosa , maka kar toto ' meman la Orgahi-Orha ' a me la ' walia it narni Persis maka a ' g edonna ghoratdoinia . E ' mana nkar tioto ' meman la Orgahi-Orha ' a kniarni .
Greet Rufus , the chosen in the Lord , and his mother and mine . ||| A kalwie'du la Rufus nor inni maka aghi ' a de emekwalima a in raralmu . Rufus de ed mak riy rwetwet la nanni onnila nkar toto ' memna la Itmatromni kniarni .
Greet Asyncritus , Phlegon , Hermes , Patrobas , Hermas , and the brothers who are with them . ||| Ne mikot nohor walia a kalwie'du la Asinkritusa , Flegon , Hermes , Patrobas , Hermas , me it inni-narni amni-hyalli honona mak kawok wut ir pa nhi'inde rkola tieru-rawur nehla la ' geni ida .
Greet Philologus and Julia , Nereus and his sister , and Olympas , and all the saints who are with them . ||| Kalwieda la Filologus me Yulia me la ' walia Nireus , nora narni patke ' a me Olimpas me la ' walia riy makpesiay re honona mak kor wut ira pa nhi'inde rkola tieru-rawur nehla la ' geni ida .
Greet one another with a holy kiss . The assemblies of Christ greet you . ||| It idma twapahar lima-tware'et mat la ida , de emeknekama twa'ina-twanar la it pesiayni ralamni . Krei mutnu-rahanu mak kler wut lia Yesus Kristus , honona e rwak kalwied tiy miy hononmi .
Now I beg you , brothers , look out for those who are causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling , contrary to the doctrine which you learned , and turn away from them . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , awuak tiy miy die orahnioratmi la ' a riy maka kiwra khi ' apie'era makpesiay re me rhi ' a makpesiaya Orgahi-Orha ' a pa ihranu ralamni wolwo'la , yoma rwatutga hya ' ed maka edonna nor Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka mimieh ' a miatg oleka re ramneha . Totpena olietmi la riy mak emkare .
For those who are such do n't serve our Lord Jesus Christ , but their own belly , and by their smooth and flattering speech they deceive the hearts of the innocent . ||| Yoma la'pa riy mak emkare de hota edonna rhima-rre ' a Yesus Kristus Itmatromlawanni tulanni-kniarni . Mere ha rhi ' to ' pa totpena ira hlie'wani ntepra . Hota ral nek nur mi'nani pa rpudi-rakla riy maka kaplinu-kaplo ' nohora ir wniehwani mak edon kaplola .
For your obedience has become known to all . I rejoice therefore over you . But I desire to have you wise in that which is good , but innocent in that which is evil . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , riy honona ratlin nan oleka yatlinmi-yatailmi la ' a wniatutu-wniaye ' a Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna . Ne a ' muana a ralmu nahepur nohor memna hya ' ed maka ha mhi ' a re . Mere awuak pa yeher to ' a pa hota miatu mpiarora-mpialai la kirkira ralma-riora samomuou totpena miatu mhi ' nan kalwiedwedni , ne yana mhi ' nan hya ' maka kyata-khala .
And the God of peace will quickly crush Satan under your feet . The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you . ||| Ne Uplerlawna mak kala kalwiedni-paitiotni la rimormiori , hota edon nalo'on wali ne E ' ed mak katowra hegana amlawanni la miy lakmi nayanni . Awuak de pen neka Itmatromlawanni Yesus Nanaloi-nanatar nan miy lia hande .
Timothy , my fellow worker , greets you , as do Lucius , Jason , and Sosipater , my relatives . ||| Timotius , a kniar wia'lu e na'enyat wualia wniak kalwiedni tiy miy . Emkade walia a hairwia'lu Lukius , Yason , me Sosipater .
I , Tertius , who write the letter , greet you in the Lord . ||| A ' u Tertius mak khorta Paulus lirni la horat di ralamni , de awuak kalwieda wali tiy miy pia emeknekama miy hyalmi la ' a pesiay ida .
Gaius , my host and host of the whole assembly , greets you . Erastus , the treasurer of the city , greets you , as does Quartus , the brother . ||| Gayus mana nwak walia kalwieda tiy miy . Paulus , a ' u de a ' g e diella e romni ne it mutwualli mak kpesiay re amhi ' a krei lia e rom de walli . Erastus de ed mak ktorna kupan leta . E mana e na'enyatga kalwiedni wal tiy miy . Emkade walia ita hyalli Kwartus .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all ! Amen . ||| Awuak de pen neka Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nanaloi-nanatar nan miy hononmi la ' hande .
Paul , called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God , and our brother Sosthenes , to the assembly of God which is at Corinth-those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus , called saints , with all who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place , both theirs and ours , Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali makden la Korintus . Miy di de krei wokni-le'enu mak Uplerlawna Npolga pa mlier la E mutnu mak kakleh do ' a-hala . Mlier la E mutnu mak kakleh do ' a-hala yoma miora Kristus Yesus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida , de mior wutga mak kden meni-meni to ' a , mak kola olek la Itmatromni Yesus Kristus tiernu . E ' de ed maka it hononita Matromlawanni E ' a . Paulus a ' u me it mutwualli Sostenes , ampak de Uplerlawna , it Amlawanni de , nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy . Agodi plolli pa ghorta horat di , yoma a ' di de maka Kristus Nhopan pa agodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Yoma Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nran a lia E wniaror wamueheni .
I always thank my God concerning you for the grace of God which was given you in Christ Jesus , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , nhi'inde asiumbain rer pia a ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna mak akola tieru-gawur nehla la de yoma la ' a E kalwiedni-paitiotni pa mliernan oleka ruri-lai la ' a Uplerlawna , de lola Kristus Yesus .
that in everything you were enriched in him , in all speech and all knowledge- ||| A ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna yoma , onnila miora Kristus mlia ' ihru ida , pede la ' mormiormi-dardiarmi de mliernan mamainia E rurni-laini pa la ' hya ' a-hya ' a to ' a de miatu mikot nohora Uplerlawna lirni , me mlier la kirkira-ralma-riora samomuou la hare honona .
even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you- ||| Ne la ' a ruri-lai miaka ha mliernana re , pede hya ' maka amakot nohora tiy miy la ' a Kristus , de miat niohora de hade plola .
so that you come behind in no gift , waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ , ||| Mliernan oleka ruri-lai maka Ha Nala tiy miy die , pede la ' lera-mela ri maka mpiewiei-mniarnar reria Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Kristus maimiaini de mniair reria ruri-lai re honona .
who will also confirm you until the end , blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Ne hota Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nhi ' aruri miy pia la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lerni-melli la ' E maimiaini , totpena la'pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'ana , de ta'en niana rto'on miy lia do ' a-hala yoma mikleh oleka hala .
God is faithful , through whom you were called into the fellowship of his Son , Jesus Christ our Lord . ||| Hota Uplerlawna e Nhi ' aruri-alai miy yoma edon Nhoratdoin E nnio'oni . E ' de Uplerlawna E inhatta , mak kpol nian miy pia mlier teman la A'nani Yesus Kristus , Itmatromlawanni de , pa miora mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
Now I beg you , brothers , through the name of our Lord , Jesus Christ , that you all speak the same thing , and that there be no divisions among you , but that you be perfected together in the same mind and in the same judgment . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , a'ultier di awuet la Yesus Kristus nanni totpena lira mak a'ukota tiy miy , mpiesiaya pa mliernohora . De awuak totpa miy hononmi yana mihuri-miwo'ora totpena yana to ' a-tai miy . Mere totpa hononmi mlia ' lir ida .
For it has been reported to me concerning you , my brothers , by those who are from Chloe 's household , that there are contentions among you . ||| Ina-nara , a'ukot emkade yoma Klo ' a rimormiorni rma raklak miy mai a ' u riwra miy e mihuri-miwo'ora ,
Now I mean this , that each one of you says , I follow Paul , I follow Apollos , I follow Cephas , and , I follow Christ . ||| de rakotiwra , riy dom tiy miy riwra rlernohora Paulus a ' u , dom de riwra rlernohora Apolsu , dom de riwra irlernohora Petrus , me la'pa dom to ' de riwra irlernohora Yesus Kristus !
Is Christ divided ? Was Paul crucified for you ? Or were you baptized into the name of Paul ? ||| Mikot lira emkade de Yesus de e rhakar la ' a-maiya ! Paulus a ' di edonna rwair wen a lia auwlakra yoma la ' miy rerieimi ! Me rharan miy miana edonna rwet la a na'nu toh !
I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crispus and Gaius , ||| A ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna yoma a ' g edonna gharan mia'ta riy id tiy miy lia hande , enekneka agharania Krispus nor Gayus rmeh ' a to ' a .
so that no one should say that I had baptized you into my own name . ||| Yanpa hota riy riwra agharania hare totpena irlernohora a ' u .
I also baptized the household of Stephanas , besides them , I do n't know whether I baptized any other . ||| O , yowa Stefanus me romni mniotni de a ' g ed mak kharania . Mere a ' g e ghoratreria de riy dom palia la hande de a ' g edonna gharan mia'ta .
For Christ sent me not to baptize , but to preach the Good News-not in wisdom of words , so that the cross of Christ would n't be made void . ||| Yoma Yesus Kristus Nal a ' die a ' g edonna muai pia gharan riy . Mere Nal to ' a ' pua ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot della lol meni-meni . Hade ho'mana yana aniairia rimormiori nohkeran di kirkirni-ralma-rior samomuounu . Yanpa hota maka ukot nohora Yesus Kristus matmiatni la ' auwlakra hananni , de hota ler la hamamuamua .
For the word of the cross is foolishness to those who are dying , but to us who are being saved it is the power of God . ||| Rimormior miak kharan nan matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa hota rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni , de er mak kiwra kot maka ha mpahaur nohor la Yesus matmiatni la ' auwlakra hananni de lir podpodku hade . Mere la'pa it hononita mak kharan nana yamori-yalewna , la it wniarorni de , emekneka Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nala kot de pa Nod it la yamori-yalewna .
For it is written , I will destroy the wisdom of the wise . I will bring the discernment of the discerning to nothing . ||| Yoma emeknekama la ' a Puklawna lirni de Uplerlawna lirni mak kiwra , La ' riy mak knairia rimormiori nohkerna kirkira ralma-rior samomuounu de hota Awueyata-wuaniaga kirkirni-ralma-riorni . Ne riy mak katu liawanni , de e lirni-yatnu mana A'uhmena-uprai .
Where is the wise ? Where is the scribe ? Where is the debater of this age ? Has n't God made foolish the wisdom of this world ? ||| Pede riy mak katu kwarora-kwalaiya , me riy mak katu kwatutu-kwaye ' a agama deullu-tatarni , la'pa riy mak katu kawo'or pa nod niana ir mutwualli wniarorni-wnialaini la ' a lera-mela ri , de Uplerlawna Ntutga oleka de ira lirni-yat wamueheni mak klernohora nohkeran di wniarorni de hota nwal lia hamamuamua toh !
For seeing that in the wisdom of God , the world through its wisdom did n't know God , it was God 's good pleasure through the foolishness of the preaching to save those who believe . ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' hade e Nlernohora E kirkirni-ralma-rior samomuou wamueheni . Wniarorni de totpa rimormiori kirkirni-ralma-riorni la'pa lirni-yatnu emkameni ho'mana hota taken niana rodi ir pa rla ' Uplerlawna . Mere Enala lira-tunu la ' a Yesus matmiatni mak amakot nohora di , mere rimormiori nohkerna ha riwra hamamuamua , de Nala na Namori-nalewna riy mak kpesiay .
For Jews ask for signs , Greeks seek after wisdom , ||| Makden Yahudi rwak pa ramkek memna hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona nanpena rpesiaya . Ne makden Yunani mana rwahak lira-yatu la ' a wniatutu-wniaye ' a iskola totpena irpesiaya .
but we preach Christ crucified , a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Greeks , ||| Mere am di de makot nohor to ' a Yesus Kristus matmiatni yala'ani la auwlakra hananni totpena Namori-nalewn ita me la ' a E wniatutnu-wniaye'eni . Kot de ed mak khi ' yawuhi-yawe'et la makden Yahudi re ralma-riorni . Noma riy mak Yahudi atia ' a re riwra lir podpodku re !
but to those who are called , both Jews and Greeks , Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God , ||| Mere hota la ' riy mak Uplerlawna Npol nian oleka re , de la ' a makden Yahudi me mak Yahudi atia ' a re , de Uplerlawna Ntutga rurni-laini me kirkira-ralma-rior samomuounu onnila Nala Yesus Kristus pa Namori-nalewna ira .
because the foolishness of God is wiser than men , and the weakness of God is stronger than men . ||| Yoma hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana Nlernohora E ralma-rior wamueheni , de rimormiori rwarora-rwalaiya de ha podku re . Mere Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni nlernohora E kirkirni-ralma-rior samomuounu , de narehi-nalawan meman la rimormiori nohkerna wniarorni-wnialaini . Ne Uplerlawna hihi'ini la ' a Yesus matmiatni , de rimormiori riwra hihi'ini de nakleha ruri-lai . Mere hihi'ini de nodi plolli pa nareh niana rimormiori rurni-laini honona .
For you see your calling , brothers , that not many are wise according to the flesh , not many mighty , and not many noble , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mhioratreria la emkameni la ' lerni Uplerlawna Npol miy . La ' makpesiay miy die enekneka riy ida-woru rmeh ' a er mak katu la rimormior yamkekni , onde er mak kodi plolli , onde rla ' marna-wuhura .
but God chose the foolish things of the world that he might put to shame those who are wise . God chose the weak things of the world that he might put to shame the things that are strong . ||| Mere plola la Uplerlawna Nwaliria mak riy riwra podku-padku totpena rhi ' amola-ma ' a mak katu . Ne Uplerlawna Nwalir wialia riy mak kakleha weli mak edon kla ' nana riy rieknenni pa na namola-nama ' a mak ha rwetwet la nanni .
God chose the lowly things of the world , and the things that are despised , and the things that do n't exist , that he might bring to nothing the things that exist , ||| Uplerlawna Nwalir niana makla ' hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara , maka ha rmakriarnia , maka rimormiori nohkeran di rwarora de edon nodi untu . Mere Nwaliria re totpena na nweyata maran penpuenu-wuhur tetema tullu-petanni .
that no flesh should boast before God . ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' hade totpena riy id mana edonna natulu-napetan la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni .
Because of him , you are in Christ Jesus , who was made to us wisdom from God , and righteousness and sanctification , and redemption , ||| Mere Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nna'ohma pede ina-nara mieh ' a miora Kristus Yesus her wiutu . Ne la ' a itpuit la Yesus mak kmati lia it rerieini de pede itat niohora Uplerlawna kirkirni-ralma-rior samomuounu mai ita la ' a Yesus matmiatni de . Yoma Yesus matmiatni de pede Uplerlawna Nhi ' it pa totpena itora E ' pa tkalwieda . Ne Enhi ' it la E mutnu-rahanu maka Nwalir niana pa Ntuwu-nhaiya la do ' a-hala ralamni .
that , as it is written , He who boasts , let him boast in the Lord . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , emekwalima maka rakot targa la Puka ralamni , de yana mpio'on atulga inon wamuehemi . Mere mikot nohora hya ' maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhi ' nana la miy rerieimi totpa riy ra'uli-rawed E ' a .
When I came to you , brothers , I did n't come with excellence of speech or of wisdom , proclaiming to you the testimony of God . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali ! La ' ler amuai pia ukot nohora tiy miy lia ' a Uplerlawna nnia'ohmani maka rimormiori nohkerna ha raplin mua'ta , de a ' g edonna niairia lira wniarora-wnialai maka rimormiori nohkeran di e rwaror nana , onde a ' g edon niairia lir marna mak samomuou .
For I determined not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ and him crucified . ||| Yoma ageti olek la de la'pa agor aplahwa nohor miy die , hota a ' g edonna wuahauru nawerna-naplahwa nohora hadom tiy miy , enekneka a wniahauru ononni de la ' a Yesus Kristus matmiatni la ' auwlakra hananni .
I was with you in weakness , in fear , and in much trembling . ||| La ' lerni adien wut tiy miy die , a ' g edonna utulu-upetan pa atiutga a lira-yat wuamueh ' u , mere a li'ru-tu'nu lolioi-hayaiya me a ' g e umta'at wenna pa adiwra-dia'ala .
My speech and my preaching were not in persuasive words of human wisdom , but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power , ||| La ' lira-tun muaka a'ukota tiy miy , de a ' g edonna liernohora rimormiori wniarorni-wnialaini pa nia'ail miy totpena mliernohor a ' u . Mere ukot nohora Uplerlawna lirni de , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nmeh ' a ed mak ktutga plolli-mneheni kuasa pa na Nkar lia riy mak katlin la a li'ru-tu'nu de ihranu ralamni .
that your faith would n't stand in the wisdom of men , but in the power of God . ||| Aliernohora hare honona totpena miy pesiaymi de nawniair to'ola Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni . Yanpa hota nawniair la rimormiori wniarora-wnialai wamueheni .
We speak wisdom , however , among those who are full grown , yet a wisdom not of this world nor of the rulers of this world who are coming to nothing . ||| Mere la ' riy maka pesiayni namtemtemn oleka , de amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni de amnairia kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou hikmat . Mere kirkira-ralma-rior mak amnairia de , kirkira-ralma-rior nohkerna hanni atia ' a onde lira yatu mak kwatiaga o'ta-mata la ' lera-mela ri mak hota la ' lera dom de rmati .
But we speak God 's wisdom in a mystery , the wisdom that has been hidden , which God foreordained before the worlds for our glory , ||| Mere kirkira-ralma-rior maka amakota re de ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna , maka la ' ler ululu , de nohkerna naplin niohor ma'ta . La ' Uplerlawna kirkira-ralma-rior samomuounu de Enet tiarg oleka la ' ler maka Uplerlawna edonna Na'ohi-na'ar ma'ta nohkeran di , totpa hota onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini pede itlernana E ra'ani-pallu mak kalwied memna .
which none of the rulers of this world has known . For had they known it , they would n't have crucified the Lord of glory . ||| Riy mak kodi plolli la nohkeran di , de riy id mana edonna nat niohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni la ' a Yesus Makamori-Kalewan de . Yoma rat niohora mana hota ir edonna rla rwairia Orgahi-Orha ' a maka ha ra'uli-rawedi diella ' auwlakra hananni .
But as it is written , Things which an eye did n't see , and an ear did n't hear , which did n't enter into the heart of man , these God has prepared for those who love him . ||| Mere iraplin niohora pede naplol la hya ' maka e rakot targ oleka la Puka ralamni de riwra , La'pa hya ' maka rimormiori edonna ratlin nan ma'ta ne edon ramkek nan ma'ta de onde edonna nla ' nan ma'ta la rimormiori wniarorni , de hade ed maka Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targa la ' a riy mak kal ralamni tetema la E ' a .
But to us , God revealed them through the Spirit . For the Spirit searches all things , yes , the deep things of God . ||| Rimormiori raplin niohor ma'ta nnia'ohma de , mere Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot oleka Uplerlawna nnia'ohmani la ' a Yesus Kristus de la mai ita . Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli de ed mak ktolwiah ' a-ktakarwah ' a hya ' a-hya ' a to'owa pa la'pa nod wialia la ' a hya ' mak kayade ' ma'ta la Uplerlawna wniarorni-wnialaini . Mere Nhiw Lululli Nat niohor oleka wa .
For who among men knows the things of a man except the spirit of the man which is in him ? Even so , no one knows the things of God except God 's Spirit . ||| Yoma mak kat niohora riy ida ihranu ralamni de enekneka riy de orgahani nmeh ' a . Emkade walia enekneka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nmeh ' a Natga Uplerlawna ihranu ralamni .
But we received not the spirit of the world , but the Spirit which is from God , that we might know the things that were freely given to us by God . ||| Ne it mana edonna tlernana nohkerna ralma-riorni , mere tlernana Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli totpena tat niohora Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu , yamori-yalewna maka Ha Nala mai ita nwatiaga Yesus Kristus .
We also speak these things , not in words which man 's wisdom teaches but which the Holy Spirit teaches , comparing spiritual things with spiritual things . ||| Pede amakot nohora hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napalga mai ita de , ami edonna mnairia lira-yat mamni mak kwatiaga rimormiori , mere a lir mamni-tun mamni maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nwatutu-nwaye ' mai ami , pa amakot nohora Uplerlawna la ' a riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni etla ralamni .
Now the natural man does n't receive the things of God 's Spirit , for they are foolishness to him , and he ca n't know them , because they are spiritually discerned . ||| Mere riy maka kakleha Uplerlawna Nhiwni , de riy de edonna nreiniana Uplerlawna Nhiwni de Ha Nakotkota . Yoma ta'en niana nna'erit nana pede nwarora lir de hamamuamua re , yoma riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la nanpena rna'erit nana lira-tunu re .
But he who is spiritual discerns all things , and he himself is to be judged by no one . ||| Yoma riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Ndella , nanpena nat niohora hya ' ed mak kaplola honona . Mere riy maka Nhiwni edonna Ndella de , id mana edonna nlernana ralma-riora pa rwaror nana riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Ndella de , hihi'ini-yapyapni .
For who has known the mind of the Lord that he should instruct him ? But we have Christ 's mind . ||| Yoma emekwalima la ' a Puka ralamni lirni mak kiwra , He ' ed mak kat niohora Orgahi-Orha ' a ralma-riorni pede e ' ed mak katu kano ' a-ka'atga ? ! Mere it maka E Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli , it nanpena er mak kat niohora Yesus Kristus ralma-riorni .
Brothers , I could n't speak to you as to spiritual , but as to fleshly , as to babies in Christ . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' ler maka agor wut miy die , ta'en niana a'ultier pia emeka agora riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la , a wniahauru . Mere a'ultier tiy miy die , emeknekama mliernohora to ' nohkeran di gahani , de la'pa a'ultier tiy miy mak na'nama mpiesiay , de aniairia lir maka plet pa mnia'erit nana pa emeka patke ' a ida naltier lia papay mak na'nama ha rmor nian de .
I fed you with milk , not with solid food , for you were n't yet ready . Indeed , you are n't ready even now , ||| Ululu de , la'pa awuatutu-wuaye ' miy , de emolmolan nekama a ' u'oka-uweher miy , de gala yamanna maka miy miatu mi'in oleka wa . Yoma la ' ler de miy ta'eni mnia'erit nan ma'ta wniatutu-wniaye ' a , mak ha rakot nohora la riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la . La ' dodo'ondi meman mana miy edonna mnia'erit nan ma'ta la ' hade !
for you are still fleshly . For insofar as there is jealousy , strife , and factions among you , are n't you fleshly , and do n't you walk in the ways of men ? ||| Emkade yoma miy edonna miolin ma'ta nhioli-lieta nohkeran miy de ! A'ukot emkade yoma hota la'pa ralammi namehra iri hati la rimormior wialmi , me mhi ' a kokokna-rariarni , de hota hare ed mak kariei pia nayamkek memna de miy edonna miolin doin ma'ta nhioli-lieta nohkerna pa emekwalima riy maka kaplin mua'ta Uplerlawna toh !
For when one says , I follow Paul , and another , I follow Apollos , are n't you fleshly ? ||| Yoma riy dom riwra amlernohor neka Paulus , ne dom de riwra amlernohor neka Apolsu . Wniehwami emkade ntutga de plol toto ' a de miy edonna miolin doin ma'ta nhioli-liet nohkeranmi de !
Who then is Apollos , and who is Paul , but servants through whom you believed , and each as the Lord gave to him ? ||| La ' a plolli de Apolsu de he ' a de ? Ne Paulus a ' muana he ' walia a ' u ? Eneknek am di Uplerlawna hopopanni mak kod miy lia pesiay la Yesus Kristus . Am mala ' nohora tulla-kniar miaka Orgahi-Orha ' a Ntutga la rima-rima kniar miamni .
I planted . Apollos watered . But God gave the increase . ||| De la Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni de a ' g ed mak kakot nohora Yesus Kristus lirni-tunnu pa emolmolan nekama mak kawuli-katniamni la nhyi'ini ralamni . Ne Apolsu ed mak kwatut miy pia emeknekama mak kal ger la ktera nhyi ' de . Mere Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a nanpena ed mak kar lia miy ihrami-ralammi pa emeknekama Namori yawuli-yatniamin de .
So then neither he who plants is anything , nor he who waters , but God who gives the increase . ||| Pede mak kodi plolli la ' kniar die Uplerlawna yoma E ' ed mak khi ' a pa kmori . La ' am die mak ktamni me mak ktera , de ami edonna mla ' a rieknenni .
Now he who plants and he who waters are the same , but each will receive his own reward according to his own labor . ||| Amro ' rewre'wa pa mla ' liewr ida la kniari id ralamni . Ne hota rima-rima amlernana a liwtu-odaw mamni wniahlani .
For we are God 's fellow workers . You are God 's farming , God 's building . ||| Yoma am di de riy mak kar riewre'wa la Uplerlawna kniarni . Mere miy di de emekwalima Uplerlawna nhyi'ini-tlunanni . Miy miana emolmolla Uplerlawna romni wali . Enmeh ' a nekpa gahani miy !
According to the grace of God which was given to me , as a wise master builder I laid a foundation , and another builds on it . But let each man be careful how he builds on it . ||| Ina-nara , la ' ruri-lai miaka Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napalga mai a ' di , aniairia la ukot nohor ulu Yesus Kristus tiy miy . La ' hade a ' g emolmolan nekama riy ida mak katu kariri roma-lewu , mak kwatatga roma watu liar yanullu . Ne riy dom to ' wal pia rma rwatutu miy die emeknekama riy maka kariria roma la watu liar yanul die wawannu . Mere mhioratreria . Hota rima-rima ntaru samomuou mat la kniarni la ' a watu liar yanullu wawannu de .
For no one can lay any other foundation than that which has been laid , which is Jesus Christ . ||| Yoma Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a neka ed maka Uplerlawna Nala pa emeknekama watu liar yanulu maka miriria miy pesiaymi la . Yana riy rwatut die e rnairi wniatatgeni dom to ' a , yoma nhiapargen id mana hadamon eti .
But if anyone builds on the foundation with gold , silver , costly stones , wood , hay , or straw , ||| Mak kmai pia kwatut miy die , dom de rnairia lira-tunu mak kaplollola mere dom mana rnairi lira-tun rimormiori mak edon nodi unut doma . Hade emeknekama riy mak kariri roma-lewu la watu liar yanul die wawannu , de dom de e rnairia leli-maha , dom de rnairia mah wawahra , dom de e rnairia wat mi'na , dom de rnairia riri-au , dom de rnairia wewan kerna onde wewna tniena .
each man 's work will be revealed . For the Day will declare it , because it is revealed in fire , and the fire itself will test what sort of work each man 's work is . ||| Rima-rima tulanni-kniarni de hota twei pia tamkek memna la ler maka Yesus Kristus maimiaini la re'eni woru . Yoma hota la ' ler de de , ai ed maka kta'aga tulla-kniari re rurni-laini totpa rima-rima kniarni de hota nayamkek memna .
If any man 's work remains which he built on it , he will receive a reward . ||| La'pa ai edon na'ana tulanni-kniarni de hota riy de nlernana prehenni .
If any man 's work is burned , he will suffer loss , but he himself will be saved , but as through fire . ||| Mere la'pa kniarni de ai nram doinia , de hota edon nlernana prehenni-maunu la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mere hota Uplerlawna Nala yamori-yalewna la e ' a onnila pesiayni , mere e hihi'ini-yapyapni edon naplol la noha wawannu pede e yaliewanni de emekto ' a enawlar liola ai mormiori ralamni mak trema-trema namutni-naki'ir e ' a .
Do n't you know that you are God 's temple and that God 's Spirit lives in you ? ||| Miy e miatga de miy di de Uplerlawna romni miy , toh ! Ne Uplerlawna Nhiwni e Nor miy tialla .
If anyone destroys God 's temple , God will destroy him , for God 's temple is holy , which you are . ||| Mere la'pa riy ida mak kwatutga hya ' mak edon kaplola pa nweyata-nwaniawua Uplerlawna romni de , riy de mana Uplerlawna ed mak kweyata-kwaniaw wualia riy de . Yoma miy die Uplerlawna romni mak E orgahi Ha Nwalir niana la E gahani .
Let no one deceive himself . If anyone thinks that he is wise among you in this world , let him become a fool that he may become wise . ||| Yana riy id tiy miy die nalahar inon wamueheni yoma nwarehi inonni onnila e ' ed mak katu nohkerna wniarorni-wnialaini . Mere samounu de nawnial doin la pa nla ' mak podku-padku la nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini totpena hota nla ' mak katu la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God . For it is written , He has taken the wise in their craftiness . ||| Yoma la ' Uplerlawna yamkekni , rimormior wniarorni-wnialaini lirni-yatnu re honona wniaror podpodku maka rwal lia hamamuamua . Hade emeknekama ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni riwra , Riy mak katu la rimormiori nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini samomuounu de , hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' pa Nwal lia hamamuamua la'pa riy e nrana inonni la lira-yat wamueheni de . Hota emeknekama riy orgahi yatnu nwutu orgahani .
And again , The Lord knows the reasoning of the wise , that it is worthless . ||| E rakot walia Puka ralamni de emkadi wali , Orgahi-Orha ' a Natga riy mak katu nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini lirni-yatnu re honona wniaror podpodku maka rwal lia hamamuamua .
Therefore let no one boast in men . For all things are yours , whether Paul , or Apollos , or Cephas , or the world , or life , or death , or things present , or things to come . All are yours , ||| La ' hade pede yana mhierlia o'ta-mata mak kwatutu miy pia nareiniande miy to ' a-tai miy onnila mi'uli-miwedi o'ta-mata doma , me la ' dom de edonna . Yoma ir honona de nek de rhima-rre ' miy . La'pa a ' u muana , onde Apolsu , me Petrusa a hononami mhima-mre ' miy totpena amod miy lia kalwiedwedni . La'pa nohkeran di , onde matmiatmi-mormiormi , la'pa lera-mela ri pa lera-mel mak kmai , hare honona re de , nodi miy lia kalwiedwedni .
and you are Christ 's , and Christ is God 's . ||| Ne miy di de mak khima-kre ' a Yesus Kristus . Ne Yesus Kristus mana ed mak khima-kre ' a Uplerlawna .
So let a man think of us as Christ 's servants and stewards of God 's mysteries . ||| Hade pede , ina-nara mpiet am lia Yesus Kristus hopopanni-lili'irnu mak khima-kre ' a E kniarni , mak Entutga pa amakot nohora hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana , mere la ' ululu de rimormiori raplin mua'ta .
Here , moreover , it is required of stewards that they be found faithful . ||| La'pa riy ida nala kniari la ' a mak ktulla-kari ida , de mak ha rwahaka la mak ktulla-kari de ononni de tlina-taili ndenrer lia upni-matromni mak ha nkar lia .
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged by you , or by a human court . Yes , I do n't even judge my own self . ||| Mere ina-nara mai a ' die la'pa mhiudi-mpiar a ' u onde rod wali a ' u la watghudi lokarni pa rwahaka a ha'lu , de a ' g edonna pusin nohora . Meman neka la a ' g edon ghudi-puar nana a inon wamueh ' u .
For I know nothing against myself . Yet I am not justified by this , but he who judges me is the Lord . ||| A ' g edonna wuaror nana a ' g e ghal la ' hadomdoma . Mere hota hade edonna nrei pia ntutga de a ' g edonna ghala . Orgahi-Orha ' a Nmeh ' a nanpa ed maka kmeh ' a Ntutga a plo'lu-ha'lu .
Therefore judge nothing before the time , until the Lord comes , who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness and reveal the counsels of the hearts . Then each man will get his praise from God . ||| La ' lerni-melli mak Orgahi-Orha ' a Nmai pia Netlia hare honona re edonna nte ' ma'ta . La ' hade pede yana riy id mana pleta-plet pa nwaghala rimormior wialli . Mpiei pleini la'pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Nmai niana . Hota E ' ed mak kalharia hya ' mak kayawunmu . E ' ed mak kweye'er targa ralma-riora mak kayamoin la rimormiori ihranu ralamni . La ' ler de nanpena rima-rima nlernan ya'ulli-yawedni la Uplerlawna .
Now these things , brothers , I have in a figure transferred to myself and Apollos for your sakes , that in us you might learn not to think beyond the things which are written , that none of you be puffed up against one another . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' a hya ' mak a'ukot oleka re , de aniairia agora Apolsu pa emeka nhior lawra ni'ita ahwa lioda contoh la tiy miy . Totpa hota la ' a mpiaror nohora a li'ru de hota mnia'erit nana hya ' maka rhorat targa la Puka . Ne la'pa mliernohora lir de , hota miy edon mi'uli-miwedia o'ta-mata doma me mipolu-milielan doma .
For who makes you different ? And what do you have that you did n't receive ? But if you did receive it , why do you boast as if you had not received it ? ||| Yoma he ' ed mak khi ' nan miy pia mriehelia miy mutwualmi ? ! Miplinga , de maka ha mliernana hare honona rde rwatiawua Uplerlawna ? ! Pede la ' a hya ' owa'an pa mhi ' inonmi de tulu-petna pa emolmolla hya ' mak kden la miy re Uplerlawna edon Nala tiy miy ? !
You are already filled . You have already become rich . You have come to reign without us . Yes , and I wish that you did reign , that we also might reign with you ! ||| Meman neka la miy edonna mpiolu-mpiak hadoma yoma la ' miy wniarorni de mliernan oleka ruri-lai , kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou honona . Mtiaru kirkira-ralma-riora pede orgahami mtiutg inonmi emeka ray . Ne am di de edonna . Kalwieda la'pa plol pa mlia ' ray totpena amlernan walia talan pa amalair nohor miy pia trewre'wa todi plolli
For I think that God has displayed us , the apostles , last of all , like men sentenced to death . For we are made a spectacle to the world , both to angels and men . ||| yoma am die mak kakleha weli . La ' a ralma-rio'ru de , ami maka Yesus Nhopan pa amodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , de Uplerlawna Nal am pia emolmolla am tutu he ' i-hepru id la rimormiori nohkerna rora Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu gaini ralamni . Ami emolmolla riy maka ha retli oleka niukum matmiati mai ami pa hota ammat lia mutlialawna gaini ralamni .
We are fools for Christ 's sake , but you are wise in Christ . We are weak , but you are strong . You have honor , but we have dishonor . ||| De , rimormiori nohkeran di ramkek am die rwaror ampodku-mpadku onnila a hihi ' mamni la ' a Yesus Kristus rerieini . Mere miy die e mpiarora de miy er mak katu yoma miora Yesus Kristus de mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Riy edon ratlin la ami , mere e ratlina-ratail tiy miy . Riy rapolu-raliel ami ne ra'uli-rawed miy .
Even to this present hour we hunger , thirst , are naked , are beaten , and have no certain dwelling place . ||| Mahnek oleka la a rehka-lar mamni , maniki-malai , ramuki-rama'al ami , la'pa amakleha rom wamueh ' a mamni wali .
We toil , working with our own hands . When people curse us , we bless . Being persecuted , we endure . ||| Amaliwtu-ma'odaw nohora yamanna wra ' muamni yahakni . La'pa riy rapolu-raliel ami mere ampak pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Ntera-ndema re . La'pa riy ramuk-rama'al ami , amatu mhur niohora .
Being defamed , we entreat . We are made as the filth of the world , the dirt wiped off by all , even until now . ||| Riy rahe ' i-ramalia ami , de amala samomuounu ma mpahla . Rhi ' am die emolmolan neka ami edonna marehelia haga ' u-hamda'ara nohkeran di , pa la'pa dodo'ondi mana e rhoi mia't am lia noha kdeheni-ktiahlani .
I do n't write these things to shame you , but to admonish you as my beloved children . ||| Aghorta hari tiy miy de ralul pia agiwra ghi ' amola-ma ' miy , mere awuagahniorat miy emekwalima a'na raralmu memna .
For though you have ten thousand tutors in Christ , you do n't have many fathers . For in Christ Jesus , I became your father through the Good News . ||| Yoma la'pa mior Yesus Kristus mlia ' a ihru ida la ' pesiaymi de miy ammi de riy ida nmeh ' a , kennama miy tungkurmi riy riwnu-riwnu . Yoma la'pa miora Yesus Kristus de mlia ' a ihru ida-ralm id wa , de a ' g ed mak khi ' a ina-am tiy miy yoma a ' g ed mak kodia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot la ' a Yesus Kristus de tiy miy .
I beg you therefore , be imitators of me . ||| Onnila ' hade pede awuak de mliernohora a yeh'wu .
Because of this I have sent Timothy to you , who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord , who will remind you of my ways which are in Christ , even as I teach everywhere in every assembly . ||| Ne totpena mliernohora a yeh'wu pede aghopna Timotius pa ntiy . La'pa rweta la mak klernohora Yesus Kristus , de aghi ' a Timotius de emekneka a'na raralmu mak edonna kmol lia a ralmu . E ' de riy mak khi ' hadom de klola Orgahi-Orha ' a ralamni . Hota e ' ed mak kwagahniorat miy lia ' a yehwa maka aliernohora yoma agor oleka Yesus Kristus mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . A yehwa la ' a a mormio'ru de nora hya ' ed maka agala ga wuatutu-wuaye ' a la ' a krei wokni-le'enu la meni-meni to ' a , de ramneneha .
Now some are puffed up , as though I were not coming to you . ||| Mere riy dom la ' miy die ratulu-rapetna olekwa . Yoma wniarorni de ratniekamde hota a ' g edonna tiy miy die .
But I will come to you shortly , if the Lord is willing . And I will know , not the word of those who are puffed up , but the power . ||| Mere la'pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Nal talan mai a ' die hota edonna nalo'on wali ne atiy miy die . Mpiei pia hota amuai die umkek walia riy mak katulu-kapetna re hihi'ini-yapyapni , de rakot nohora ir rurni-laini to'ola nurnu onde plol toto ' a pa raruri-ralai yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la .
For God 's Kingdom is not in word , but in power . ||| Yoma la'pa Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la riy ida mormiorni , de Uplerlawna Ntutga ruri-lai la riy de mormiorni totpena nwehwa-nlakat la plol wawna . Hota riy de edon nakot to ' a la ' nurnu niwra enaruri-nalai .
What do you want ? Shall I come to you with a rod , or in love and a spirit of gentleness ? ||| Pede mpialir nieka hya ' maka ralammi ha nala . Mhioratreria , mhierun doinia nhiolmi-lietmi mak katulu-kapetna de totpena yana amuai die a'uwenan la ' miy . Mere amuai die agodi mnapla me kalwied nohora wniatutu-wniaye ' a tiy miy .
It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you , and such sexual immorality as is not even named among the Gentiles , that one has his father 's wife . ||| Nee ! A orgah ' u utlin memn oleka la ' a miy die de doma e ralira-raliai , rareta-rahawa . De riy id tiy miy de enor owa'ana ina nhia'nanni ibu tiri raliai . Riy mak kaplin mua'ta Uplerlawna nekane nhiolli ematia ' emkade , ne emkameni ho'ola miy ? !
You are arrogant , and did n't mourn instead , that he who had done this deed might be removed from among you . ||| Mere miy die edonna mmiola-mmia ' a mere mpiehwa-mliakta natulu-napetan ma'ta la pesiaymi die ! Mere mak kaplollolli de totpena miy ralammi rmawal la riy de nhiolli-lietni pa mhiokar gota la ' a miy wokmi-le'emi .
For I most certainly , as being absent in body but present in spirit , have already , as though I were present , judged him who has done this thing . ||| Ina-nar miy re ! Meman nek la a ' g edon gor miy lia hande , mere emkade ho'mana emeknekama agor miy lia hande pa agetlia de riy mak kwehwa nhioli-lieta yatyata re pa rukmua !
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , when you are gathered together with my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ , ||| La'pa miwoka-mile ' wa la Yesus Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni ralamni , ne mriekan walia a ' g etla hande . Ne hota la ' a Yesus Orgahi-Orha ' a plolli-mneheni pa
you are to deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh , that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus . ||| hononmi mhiokar doin e la krei wokni-le'enu pa mial riy della hegana amlawanni totpena hota la ' nohkeran di , de e nler la lui-nuhru , yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Mhi ' emkade totpa hota nreiniande enhoitio'or doini do'oni-halli totpa nler la yamori-yalewna la ' ler mak Orgahi-Orha ' a Nmai owa'ana .
Your boasting is not good . Do n't you know that a little yeast leavens the whole lump ? ||| Mere miy die yana wniehwami-liakatmi natulu-napetna la ' a pesiaymi . Yanpa miplin niek la hala id to ' nekane narieiniande yatni-halli na'ititar rer lia ? ! Hade emeknekama mak nhi'inde ha riwra de , hota rkeni tgo ' a oke ' to'ola wetra ' ota tarigu mere hota nwah ' a petna honona .
Purge out the old yeast , that you may be a new lump , even as you are unleavened . For indeed Christ , our Passover , has been sacrificed in our place . ||| La ' hade pede mhiopliala nhioli-lieta yotyota-yatyata honona , totpena emeknekama la ' Paska lerni Yahudi re rhopliala roti mak knairi tgo ' a ragi . La ' talan emkade pede miy mpial lia riy mak kakleha do ' a-hala . Yoma plollolli de miy er mak kden la plol wawna onnila Yesus Kristus Nwali olek la duma maka ha rhi ' a la hoihoi-tantiani la Paska Yahudi . Ne miy miana emeknekama roti mak kakleha tgo ' maka Yahudi re ra'an la ' ler de .
Therefore let 's keep the feast , not with old yeast , neither with the yeast of malice and wickedness , but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth . ||| La ' hade pede la ' it mormiorni di , itsi ' emeka ha rhi ' a la Yahudi lerlalawanni de , de emeknekama ir edon ra'an rot miaka rala tgo ' a ra rawniah ' a de hota yana tsi ' a do ' a-hala la'pa yatyatni-halalli . Mere itsi ' to ' a hya ' a mak kaplola-kamneh ' a emeka ta'ana rot miaka edonna rnairi tgo ' a .
I wrote to you in my letter to have no company with sexual sinners , ||| Ina-nara , la a hortu mak kala ' ulu de a ' g e ukot nohor tiy miy de yan memmemna mior wutga riy makalira-kaliai re mpiatamputu .
yet not at all meaning with the sexual sinners of this world , or with the covetous and extortionists , or with idolaters , for then you would have to leave the world . ||| Mak a'ukota re de a li'ru edon ntaiya riy mak kaplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna pede nhi'inde ralira-raliai onde ir ralamni rapal niana kupna-kai , re ' a-tniaru onde mak ka'ana rira liwatnu-odawni onde mak kru ' u-ktowar la uplera-upmati . A ' g edonna ukota pa mihal doin riy mak edon kpesiay mak khi ' emkade . La'pa miy edon mhiol lia nohkeran di wawannu nanpena mliernan talan pa mihal doin mak edon kpesiay riwnu-halli re .
But as it is , I wrote to you not to associate with anyone who is called a brother who is a sexual sinner , or covetous , or an idolater , or a slanderer , or a drunkard , or an extortionist . Do n't even eat with such a person . ||| Mere a ralma-rio'ru , de yana miora riy mak kakota kiwra ir de makpesiay , mere ralira-raliai onde ralamni rapal niana kupna-kai re ' a-tniaru onde rru ' u-rtowar la uplera-upmati , onde rahe ' i-ramali riy onde rpehera-rma'wu onde mak ka'ana rira liwatnu-odawni . La ' a riy mak emkare , yana mrie ' teman la re . La'pa mimtatan wutu pa mi'ina-miemnu ho'mana , yana .
For what do I have to do with also judging those who are outside ? Do n't you judge those who are within ? But those who are outside , God judges . Put away the wicked man from among yourselves . ||| Yoma la ' a riy mak edonna kpesiay mia'ta , de a ' g edonna puaran pia ukot nohora re . Uplerlawna nanpena ed mak kodi plolli pa ketlia ir do'oni-halli . Mere makpesiay miy er maka mieh ' a mietlia riy mak kler olek la krei wokni-le'enu do'oni-halli , yoma emeka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de riwra , Mhiokar doinia riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala la ' a wokmi-le'emi ralamni .
Dare any of you , having a matter against his neighbor , go to law before the unrighteous , and not before the saints ? ||| Ina-nara , la'pa miora inmi-narmi makpesiay re miwo'ora , de hya ' a nrei pia mpiaran pia la miklaka krei wialmi de la ' makho'ota-klewta mak kaplin mua'ta Uplerlawna totpena iretlia ? ! Nihya'pa edonna mpiaka Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu pa retlia lira-tunu rena de ? !
Do n't you know that the saints will judge the world ? And if the world is judged by you , are you unworthy to judge the smallest matters ? ||| Miplinga de hota Uplerlawna rimormiorni er mak kodi plolli pa ketlia nohkeran di halli ? ! Hota makpesiay it de , er maka ketlia nohkeran di do'oni-halli , yaho'ma lira-tun muaka ha riwra lirmou-aparputi rina ? !
Do n't you know that we will judge angels ? How much more , things that pertain to this life ? ||| Miy e miplin mua'ta de hota it er mak ketlia Uplerlawna lili'irnu-hopopanni malaikat halli ? ! Yaho'ma rimormiori lira-tunu maka ir rhi ' a lera-lera rina ? !
If then you have to judge things pertaining to this life , do you set them to judge who are of no account in the assembly ? ||| Pede hota emkameni la lira-tun mak emkare , de miala la riy mak kaplin niohora Uplerlawna yala'ani pa retlia ? !
I say this to move you to shame . Is n't there even one wise man among you who would be able to decide between his brothers ? ||| A'ukot emkade totpa aghi ' a amola-ma ' a miy . Yanpa riy mak katu hadamon wal lia ' miy pa retlia lira-tunu mak mutwualmi re ha rhi ' nana re ,
But brother goes to law with brother , and that before unbelievers ! ||| pede miala mutwualmi lirni-tunnu de pa makho'ota-klewta retlia ? ! Ne hade edon nmeh ' a mere makho'ota-klewta de makpesiay Uplerlawna atia ' e ' a !
Therefore it is already altogether a defect in you that you have lawsuits one with another . Why not rather be wronged ? Why not rather be defrauded ? ||| La'pa miodia riy lirni-tunnu la makho'ota-klewta retlia , hade nnia'eratni de mlier toto ' olek la hala ralamni . Emkade pede emeknekama ra'unut nan olek miy . Samomuounu de riy rhi ' yatyatni tiy miy onde rhi ' aruki miy . Mere ralul pia yana miy er mak ktot nan riy dom la klieratni yoma miodia la nhio'ota-liewta .
No , but you yourselves do wrong and defraud , and that against your brothers . ||| Mere la'pa miodi riy la nhio'ota-liewta de miy er mak ktot riy de la yatyatni pa mieh ' a mtiot aruki e ' a , kennama maka mtiot la klieratni de , mak pesiay wialmi re !
Or do n't you know that the unrighteous will not inherit God 's Kingdom ? Do n't be deceived . Neither the sexually immoral , nor idolaters , nor adulterers , nor male prostitutes , nor homosexuals , ||| Yana miakal nan inon wamuehemi . Miy e miat niohora de riy mak edonna klernohora Uplerlawna wniayowni hota edonna rrekan wutga la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka ir Rayni toh ? ! Yoma riy mak kalira-kaliai , riy mak kru ' u-ktowar la uplera-upmati , mak kaliai mehlimlimni , mak khi ' nhiolia yotyota-yatyata mak kodia molmola-mama ' a la ' a muanke ' a nora muanke ' a maka ha wniadu'ula ,
nor thieves , nor covetous , nor drunkards , nor slanderers , nor extortionists , will inherit God 's Kingdom . ||| mak kamnelu-kamna ' a , mak ralamni napal niana kupna-kai re ' a-tniaru , mak kpehera-kma'wu , mak kapolu-kaliella , ne mak ka'ana rira liwatnu-odawni , riy honona mak emkare de hota edonna rrekan wutga la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka Enodi plolli .
Some of you were such , but you were washed . You were sanctified . You were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus , and in the Spirit of our God . ||| Ne la ' ululu de la ' riy dom tiy miy , nhiolli-lietni emkade wali . Mere lera-mela ri de mlier olek la yamou-yawitna la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni . Mlier olek la Uplerlawna gah wamueheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala . Enetlia de miy edon mhial owa'ana onnila Itmatromni Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni , me Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli rurni-laini .
All things are lawful for me , but not all things are expedient . All things are lawful for me , but I will not be brought under the power of anything . ||| Ina-nara , doma rakot wal die riwra it inonni di edonna la ' a rieknenni la ' a pesiay . Emkade hota plolli nek la e ralma-riorni la ' a hya ' maka ha niwa nhi ' a la e inonni . Mere hihi ' a-yapyapi re honona edonna rperkuna . A ' g edonna wuayow pa gala a ino'nu la ' a hya ' a-hya ' to ' pa nodi plolli la .
Foods for the belly , and the belly for foods , but God will bring to nothing both it and them . But the body is not for sexual immorality , but for the Lord , and the Lord for the body . ||| Dom mana riwra , Ya'ana-yemnu de nla ' to ' it apannu ne it apannu de ed mak kwatierun neka ya'ana-yemnu . La ' ler mak it mat die , Uplerlawna nareiniande ya'ana-yemnu nor wut wuali it apannu de hota it edonna tnairi owa'ana , pede it apannu la'pa it inonni tetema itnairia pa tsi ' hadom de plolli nek la ita . Mere a'ukot tiy miy die , edon emkade . Plollolli de yana itnairia it inonni de pa ta talira-taliai . Mere itnairia it inon pa ta'uli-tawedi Orgahi-Orha ' a . Ne Orgahi-Orha ' a mana hota ed mak ktera-kdema inon de .
Now God raised up the Lord , and will also raise us up by his power . ||| Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa Namori-nalewn oleka Itmatromni Yesus inonni la ' a matmiatni . Ne hota emkade wal lia Uplerlawna Namori it inonni la matmiati ralamni wali .
Do n't you know that your bodies are members of Christ ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute ? May it never be ! ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miatga la ' miy inonmi de Yesus Kristus inonni wali hade toh ? ! Pede hota emkameni la itnairi it inonni pa itora patke ' yatyata tanin wutu ? ! La'pa emkade de emeknekama Yesus nor pat de ralira-raliai . La'pa emkameni ho'mana yan memmemna mhi ' emkade !
Or do n't you know that he who is joined to a prostitute is one body ? For , The two , he says , will become one flesh . ||| Onde matialo'onamde miy e miplin mua'ta la ' a riy mak kor patke ' yatyata ralira-raliai de hota emekwalima nora rla ' ihyida-ralmida ? ! Yoma etla Puka ralamni de e rakot nohora riwra , Ha ror rla ' wutu ihyida-ralmida .
But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit . ||| Mere riy mak klernohor oleka Orgahi-Orha ' a nor olek E ' pa rla ' wutga ihru ida-ralm ida .
Flee sexual immorality ! Every sin that a man does is outside the body , but he who commits sexual immorality sins against his own body . ||| Pede olietmi la yehwa yalira-yaliai . Yoma la ' a do ' a-hala re honona maka riy rhi ' nana de , eneknek to'ama yalira-yaliai mak khi ' do ' a-hal la rira inon wamueheni .
Or do n't you know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you , whom you have from God ? You are not your own , ||| Ina-nara , miatga oleka de la ' a miy inonmi de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli romni eda de toh ? ! Ne Nhiwni die nor miy tialla . Ne Uplerlawna ed mak kala Nhiwni de tiy miy . Miy inonmi de wamuehemi atia ' hade . Mere Uplerlawna gahani hade .
for you were bought with a price . Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit , which are God 's . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Naweli olek miy wia ne npairia mati olek miy wia . La ' hade pede mpiehwa-mliakat la inonmi de totpena miodi ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna .
Now concerning the things about which you wrote to me , it is good for a man not to touch a woman . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , dodo'ondi agiwra wuahla yatianmi re maka ha mkienia la horatmi ralamni , de , la'pa muanke ' a ida edonna nmehlima de hade samoga ? Meman nek la hade samoga .
But , because of sexual immoralities , let each man have his own wife , and let each woman have her own husband . ||| Mere riy harahu nhi'inde ralira-raliai . La ' hade pede samounu de muanke ' a hawni etla ne patke ' a mana hawni etla totpena yana rler la yapi ' u-yaga ' u pa rwaror yotyota-yatyatni pa ralira-raliai .
Let the husband give his wife the affection owed her , and likewise also the wife her husband . ||| Muanke ' a mak kmehlim olekwa de , yana nwayotlia hawni patke ' a la'pa niwra nora pa ranin wutu me patke ' a mak kmehlim mana yana nwayotlia muanke'eni la'pa niwra nora pa ranin wutu . Mak kmehlim oleka re hihi'ini-yapyapni mak kaplola de emkade .
The wife does n't have authority over her own body , but the husband does . Likewise also the husband does n't have authority over his own body , but the wife does . ||| Rhi ' emkade yoma patke ' a inonni de , inon wamueheni atia ' hade . Inonni de , muanke'eni gahani wali hade . Emkade wal lia muanke ' a inonni de , inon wamueheni atia ' hade , mere inonni de patke'eni gahani wali hade .
Do n't deprive one another , unless it is by consent for a season , that you may give yourselves to fasting and prayer , and may be together again , that Satan does n't tempt you because of your lack of self-control . ||| Pede yan memmemna idma nwayotlia hawni wakwakni pa ranin wutu , enekneka la ler ho'ke'eni maka ha rnairia pa rsumbaini yoma irrora rla ' lir id pa rhi ' emkade . Mere yan nalo'ona . Nhor diewade hota idma nwakriani owa'an id la pa emeknekama mak kmehlima-kmarya ' a . Yana idma olieta la ida totpena yana hegana amlawanni Setan napi ' u-naga ' nian miy yoma la ' a miy edon mtiahan nana ralam na'hirmi .
But this I say by way of concession , not of commandment . ||| Mere la'pa a'ukot emkade de ralul pia agiwra ghopan pa riy honona rmehlima , mere a'ukot to ' a la ' a ralma-rior wamueh ' u .
Yet I wish that all men were like me . However , each man has his own gift from God , one of this kind , and another of that kind . ||| Mere a ' die , agiwra totpa riy honona emekwali a ' pua edonna rmehlima . Mere Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka ed mak kala rima-rima ra'ani-pallu karunia . La ' riy id de Nala ra ' a-palu pia hota edonna nmehlima . La ' riy dom de , Nala ra ' a-palu pia nmehlima .
But I say to the unmarried and to widows , it is good for them if they remain even as I am . ||| Nah , la ' a riy mak edonna kmehlim ma'ta , me la ' a pat mak kapalg olekwa , de mitlina a nnio ' u di . Ralma-riora samomuou nden tiy miy die , miprirtiuw pua emek a ' u .
But if they do n't have self-control , let them marry . For it 's better to marry than to burn with passion . ||| Mere la'pa miy edonna mirur nian la ralam na'hirmi de mmiehlim nek wa . Yoma la ' a samomuou owa'an de mmiehlima , yanhi'pa na'hirmi nha'at la temmi .
But to the married I command-not I , but the Lord-that the wife not leave her husband ||| Ne la'pa mak kmehlim olekwa , de mitlina mak a'ukota ri ! La ' a plollolli de a ' g edonna ukot nana lira di mere lir di Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni hadi . La ' a a'na patke ' a mak kmehlima ida de yana nahmen doin hawni .
but if she departs , let her remain unmarried , or else be reconciled to her husband , and that the husband not leave his wife . ||| Mere la'pa la hadom pa nahmen doin olek la muanke'eni , de yana nwarora-nwalai owa'ana mehlima , enekneka nawali owa'an la muanke'eni ululu de . Ne muanke ' a ida de yana nahmen doin hawni .
But to the rest I-not the Lord-say , if any brother has an unbelieving wife , and she is content to live with him , let him not leave her . ||| A nnio ' a-nia'tu la riy dom pal tiy miy die mitlina . Hadi edonna nwatiawua Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus lirni mere a ' g ed mak ukot nan lir di . De la'pa makpesiay ida nmehlim olek wa pa nor patke ' a maka edonna kpesiay mia'ta mere emkade ho'mana patke ' de nwayow pa nora e ' pa rden wut mua'ta , de yan memmemna muanke ' de nasrala patke ' de pa nodia pa la nmati .
The woman who has an unbelieving husband , and he is content to live with her , let her not leave her husband . ||| Ne la'pa patke ' a makpesiay ida nmehlim olek pa nora muanke ' a maka edonna kpesiay mia'ta mere emkade ho'mana nwayow pa nora patke ' de rden wut mua'ta , de yan memmemna patke ' de nasrala muanke ' de pa nodia pa la nmati .
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife , and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the husband . Otherwise your children would be unclean , but now they are holy . ||| Yoma hawa patke ' a makpesiay olek de narieinian de mehlimni de nakleha do ' a-hala la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Emkade wal lia hawa muanke ' a makpesiay olek de narieiniande mehlimni de nakleha do ' a-hala la Uplerlawna yamkekni . La'pa edon emkade hota upa-a'na re edon rden wal lia Uplerlawna limni ralamni .
Yet if the unbeliever departs , let there be separation . The brother or the sister is not under bondage in such cases , but God has called us in peace . ||| Mere la'pa riy mak edonna kpesiay mia'ta , nahmen doinia hawni patke ' a makpesiay , onde hawni patke ' a mak edon kpesiay , nahmen doinia hawni muanke ' a mak pesiay olekwa , de miollia pa emkade . La'pa emkade , de hota hawni makpesiay de edonna ha wniatiehra wutg owa'an la hawni mak edon kpesiay . Yana makpesiay ntekal hawni mak edon kpesiay pa yana nla ' a . Yoma Uplerlawna Nahmena yahuri-yawo'ora .
For how do you know , wife , whether you will save your husband ? Or how do you know , husband , whether you will save your wife ? ||| Miollia pa hapmi de nla ' a yoma miplin niohora de hapmi mak edon kpesiay de hota nlernohora miy pia npesiaya , pede hota nler la mormiori-lewlewna ralamni . Yanpa hota edonna .
Only , as the Lord has distributed to each man , as God has called each , so let him walk . So I command in all the assemblies . ||| Mere ina-narmi re , yana mpiahak talan pa mhierun doin mormiormi mak emkameni mana la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Npol nian miy pa mpiesiay E ' a . Yoma mormior mak emkade ed maka Itmatromlawanni Nala tiy miy . Hade ed maka a'uno ' a-unatga la krei wokni-le'enu honona la meni-meni to ' a .
Was anyone called having been circumcised ? Let him not become uncircumcised . Has anyone been called in uncircumcision ? Let him not be circumcised . ||| Yawalliohorni umpamni de , la'pa rsunat oleka riy ida la ' lera enlernana Uplerlawna polpuolu pa Nhi ' a la E gah wamueheni de , yan memmemna riy de nwahak talan pa nhap dioinia sunat de enni . Hade emkade wal lia ' riy maka edonna rsunat ma'ta la ' a lera enlernan oleka Uplerlawna polpuolu de yana enwak pa rsunat e ' a .
Circumcision is nothing , and uncircumcision is nothing , but what matters is keeping God 's commandments . ||| Yoma tlernohora deulu-tatra sunat onde it edonna tlernohora ho'mana rrora rewre'wa pa edonna rla yawuhi-yawe'eta . Hornama tlernohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak Ha Nakota .
Let each man stay in that calling in which he was called . ||| Pede yana mpiahak talan pa mhierun doin genmi-tienmi la ' ler maka rima-rima nlernana polpuollu la Uplerlawna .
Were you called being a bondservant ? Do n't let that bother you , but if you get an opportunity to become free , use it . ||| Emkadi owa'ana . La ' ler maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Npol nian miy pia mlia ' E gah wamueheni de , la'pa miy die ata-wa'ara hopopna-lili'iru miy die , yana mpiarora-mpialai lia ralammi pa miayo ' a-miatau yoma ata-wa'ar miy . Mere yanhi'pa hota rran tutul miy pia mpial lia riy lalawna doma , de yana mpiayotlia .
For he who was called in the Lord being a bondservant is the Lord 's free man . Likewise he who was called being free is Christ 's bondservant . ||| Miy mhi ' ata-wa'ara onde ata-wa'ara atia ' miy , de la Uplerlawna yamkekni de edonna nhi ' hadoma . Yoma riy makpesiay makhi ' ata-wa'ara la'pa makpesiay hononmi , de Itmatromni Nwe'er doini oleka . Yoma Nwe'er doini olek miy lia do ' a-hala ralamni . Ne la'pa makhi ' ata-wa'ar atia ' miy , la'pa miy hononmi makpesiay de mpiali olek la Itmatromni Yesus Kristus atni-wa'arni hopopanni-lili'irnu pa mhima-mrie ' E kniarni .
You were bought with a price . Do n't become bondservants of men . ||| Uplerlawna Naweli olek miy hononmi ne miy welmi ho'mana rwaphar eti olekwa . Hade pede yana mitlin la rimormior wialmi pa rwa'ata-rwa'ar miy mere mitlina-mitailla Orgahi-Orha ' a .
Brothers , let each man , in whatever condition he was called , stay in that condition with God . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' hadi nnia'eratni , de totpa yana mtiekal pa mhierun doin genmi-tienmi mak emkameni la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Npol nian miy pa mpiesiay E ' a , me totpena miora Uplerlawna mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
Now concerning virgins , I have no commandment from the Lord , but I give my judgment as one who has obtained mercy from the Lord to be trustworthy . ||| Twahaur la riy maka edonna kmehlim ma'ta . La ' hade de a ' g edon liernana lira la Orgahi-Orha ' a , mere onnila Orgahi-Orha ' a ralam kalwiedni mai a ' pua Nal a pua a lia ' riy maka ha rpesiaya pede ukot nohora nnio ' a-niat di tiy miy .
Therefore I think that because of the distress that is on us , it 's good for a man to remain as he is . ||| Tsoratnana hota la ' lera-mela ri de itler la kropanni-krieutnu , pede awuarora la samomuounu de miprirtiuwu .
Are you bound to a wife ? Do n't seek to be freed . Are you free from a wife ? Do n't seek a wife . ||| La'pa miy miaka patke'emi er olek la , de yana mihak talan pa misrala pat de . La'pa miy e mikleh ma'ta patke ' a de yan mihaka mehlimmi .
But if you marry , you have not sinned . If a virgin marries , she has not sinned . Yet such will have oppression in the flesh , and I want to spare you . ||| Mere la'pa miy mmiehlim de do ' a-hal atia ' hade . Emkade wal lia harara ida mak kiwra kmehlima , de ralul pia itiwra hade enhi ' a do ' a-hala . Mere riy mak kmehlima , de hota rapal niana kropan lawna . Ne awuak pa totpena yana mlier la kropan lawan de .
But I say this , brothers , the time is short . From now on , both those who have wives may be as though they had none , ||| Ina-nara , a ralma-rio'ru de emkadi , It ed olek la klieratni yoma lera-mela rwakrian dioin la , pede yanpa nohkeran di yala'ani de nhi ' yawuhi-yawe'et la miy pa hota miy edon mial ralammi tetema pa mkiar lia Uplerlawna kniarni . Pa la ler di la'pa nodi liarni muanke ' mak mehlim olekwa de yana rwaror to ' a ir mehlimni .
and those who weep , as though they did n't weep , and those who rejoice , as though they did n't rejoice , and those who buy , as though they did n't possess , ||| Riy mak kakru de mhi ' emeknekama ralam mawalmi de edon nhi ' yawuhi-yawe'eta . Ne riy mak kahe ' i-kahepur de , totpa he ' i-heparnu de edon narieiniande nhortaplinga Uplerlawna kniarni . Riy mak kaweli yohya ' a de yana rhoratreri hyonni-hyanni re pa rhortaplinga Uplerlawna kniarni , yoma hyonni-hyanni re hota edonna nden rer lia pa nodi liarni .
and those who use the world , as not using it to the fullest . For the mode of this world passes away . ||| Hya ' maka riy rwarora-rwalai niohora la'pa tulanni-kniarni , me hare honona la nohkeran di wawannu de yana riy rha'ar aranni la . Yoma hota edon nalo'on wali ne nohkeran di nor wutga hya ' maka tamkeka re hota edonna rden olekwa .
But I desire to have you to be free from cares . He who is unmarried is concerned for the things of the Lord , how he may please the Lord , ||| Awuak de yana mlier la ralma worworga onnila mpiaror harahu la nohkeran di yala'ani . La ' riy mak edon kmehlima de edon nler la ralma-rior emkade , mere nwaror to ' a Uplerlawna kniarni . Yoma enwaror nohora emkameni la hota nhi ' amikria Orgahi-Orha ' a ihranu ralamni .
but he who is married is concerned about the things of the world , how he may please his wife . ||| Mere riy mak patke'eni ed olek la de hota nwaror harahu la nohkeran di yala'ani . Yoma nwahak de totpena nhi ' amikria hawni patke ' a ihranu ralamni .
There is also a difference between a wife and a virgin . The unmarried woman cares about the things of the Lord , that she may be holy both in body and in spirit . But she who is married cares about the things of the world-how she may please her husband . ||| La'awa hohoni de hota ralma-riorni nahniakra . Mere pat maka hawni nmati olekwa , onde patke ' a mak edonna nmehlim ma'ta hota wniarorni nden rer mamain la Orgahi-Orha ' a pede nal inonni me ralam tetema pa nhima-nre ' a me totpa yehwani nlernohor E ' a . Mere patke ' a maka hawni ed olek la de ralma-riorni nden rer lia nohkeran di yala'ani yoma ralma-riorni nhoratrer lia hawni muanke ' a totpena nhi ' amikria e ihranu ralamni .
This I say for your own benefit , not that I may ensnare you , but for that which is appropriate , and that you may attend to the Lord without distraction . ||| Aghorta hari honona tiy miy totpena orgahami mlier la kalwiedwedni . A ' g edon ghorat lira ri pa aliarna miy , mere totpena miy wniehwami nod miy lia kalwieda-paitiota me ralma-riormi mana edonna nahniakra mere nden rer lia Orgahi-Orha ' a .
But if any man thinks that he is behaving inappropriately toward his virgin , if she is past the flower of her age , and if need so requires , let him do what he desires . He does n't sin . Let them marry . ||| La'pa muanke ' ida niwra nmehlima nora patke ' a maka ha rnelu tiaru pua hota rmehlima , ne patke ' de tuwnu nkern olekwa , miollia pa rmehlima . Yana rwei mia'ta la'pa muanke ' de hihi'ini-yapyapni edon lol talanni la patke ' de . Mere rmehlim nek wa . Mehlim de do ' a-hal atia ' hade .
But he who stands steadfast in his heart , having no urgency , but has power over his own will , and has determined in his own heart to keep his own virgin , does well . ||| Mere la'pa riy de edonna nwayow pa hota nora pat mak hota ha niwra nor rmehlima , hya ' maka ha nhi ' a re de naplola , hornama edon nmehlima de nlernohora e ralma-rior wamueheni . Yana riy roir reri e ' a totpa yana nmehlima .
So then both he who gives his own virgin in marriage does well , and he who does n't give her in marriage does better . ||| Pede plolli meman de riy mak kora pat de rmehlima de hihi'ini-yapyapni de samoga . Mere mak edonna kor patke ' de rmehlima , de hihi'ini-yapyapni de narehi owa'ana la ' mak mehlima .
A wife is bound by law for as long as her husband lives , but if the husband is dead , she is free to be married to whomever she desires , only in the Lord . ||| Patke ' mak kmehlima ida e nawniatiehr olek la muanke'eni la'pa muanke'eni nmormior mia'ta . Mere la'pa muanke'eni nmati , de pat de mana nakleh oleka yawuhi-yawe'eta pa niwa nmehlim owa'an de plolli nek la e ' wa , hornama nora makpesiay ida rmehlima .
But she is happier if she stays as she is , in my judgment , and I think that I also have God 's Spirit . ||| Mere hota na'unut memna , de la'pa edonna nmehlim owa'ana . Ne a ralma-rio'ru de , mak a'ukot di nwatiaga Uplerlawna Nhiwni .
Now concerning things sacrificed to idols , We know that we all have knowledge . Knowledge puffs up , but love builds up . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' hadi de a'ukot nohora la ' a ya'ana-yemnu mak ha rhoi-rtani . Miy die mitulu-mipetna inonmi pa miwra , Makpesiay it hononita tat niohora oleka de itler la kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou hikmat la hare honona . Mere a'ukot tiy miy die kirkira-ralma-rior mak emkade nariei piede riy ratulu-rapetna . Mere la'pa ittulla-tsayni it rimormior wialli de , de itod ir la ' pesiay mak karuri-kalai .
But if anyone thinks that he knows anything , he does n't yet know as he ought to know . ||| Riy mak katniekamde enatu liawanni la ' a Uplerlawna yala'ani , de plollolli de enaplin mua'ta Uplerlawna yala'ani .
But anyone who loves God is known by him . ||| Mere riy mak kal ralamni tetema la Uplerlawna , de Uplerlawna Nat niohor memna e ' a .
Therefore concerning the eating of things sacrificed to idols , we know that no idol is anything in the world , and that there is no other God but one . ||| Ina-nara , agiwra ukot nohora tiy miy lia uplera-upmati me yamanna mak riy rhoi-rtania . Makpesiay it de tat niohora uplera-upmati re edon naplola me edon rodi plolli . Ne itatga de Uplerlawna Nmemeh ' a to ' a pa Nodi plolli .
For though there are things that are called gods , whether in the heavens or on earth-as there are many gods and many lords- ||| Meman nek la riy rhoi-rtania uplera-upmati harahu , mak kden la lyanti me mak kden la nohkerna wawannu ,
yet to us there is one God , the Father , of whom are all things , and we for him , and one Lord , Jesus Christ , through whom are all things , and we live through him . ||| mere la makpesiay it de , Uplerlawna Nmemeh ' a to ' a . E ' ed mak khi ' Am la ' it hononita . E ' ed mak ka'ohi-ka'ara . Ne itmormiori-tdardiar pia tsima-tre ' E ' a . Ne Orgahi-Orha ' a mana ida Nmemeh ' a to ' a , de Yesus Kristus . La ' E ' pede hare honona erla . Ne la ' a E hihi'ini pede itler la yamori-yadari .
However , that knowledge is n't in all men . But some , with consciousness of an idol until now , eat as of a thing sacrificed to an idol , and their conscience , being weak , is defiled . ||| La'pa emkade ho'mana makpesiay honona edon rat momuou mua'ta uplera-upmati re de edon naplola me edon rodi plolli . Yoma la ululu de la ' ler maka edonna rpesiay ma'ta , de ir er mak kru ' u-ktowar la uplera-upmati . La ' hade pede la ' dodo'ondi mana la'pa ir ra'ana nhioini-tnianni mak riy mak edon kpesiay re ra'olga re , de la ira wniarorni de , ir rhi ' oleka do ' a-hal la ir inonni . Irwaror emkade yoma pesiayni re edon rarur mia'ta .
But food will not commend us to God . For neither , if we do n't eat are we the worse , nor if we eat are we the better . ||| Mere plolli de ya'ana-yemnu nek de edonna nodia taliorta-lakatrai lia it tora Uplerlawna . La'pa ita'ana yamanan de , it edonna tlernana hadomdom pali . Rwaldioinia de la'pa it edon ta'ana yamanan de mana it edonna truk wiali .
But be careful that by no means does this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to the weak . ||| Mere erammi ! Yanpa riy doma rler la do ' a-hala ralamni onnila rlernohora miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi . Meman neka la Uplerlawna Nwayow nohora hihi'imi-yapyapmi de , mere la ' ir yamkekni de do ' a-hala eda de .
For if a man sees you who have knowledge sitting in an idol 's temple , wo n't his conscience , if he is weak , be emboldened to eat things sacrificed to idols ? ||| Miatu oleka uplera-upmati re edon naplola me edon rodi plolli , mere la'pa riy mak kaplinu kwalir nian hya ' ed mak khala onde hya ' ed mak kaplola de , enamkek rer miy mi'ina-miemnu hya ' ed mak ha rhoi-rtania la roma nhioi-tnian die , miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi de narieiniande hota enparan pia ena'an walia ya'ana-yemun de .
And through your knowledge , he who is weak perishes , the brother for whose sake Christ died . ||| Ne la ' hade pede hya ' maka miat niohora de , nariei pia riy mak kaplinu kwalir ma'ta plolli-halli nler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . Ne riy de mana ed maka Yesus Kristus Nmati olek la e rerieini .
Thus , sinning against the brothers , and wounding their conscience when it is weak , you sin against Christ . ||| Ne la'pa mhi ' do ' a-myap hiala mak emkade la inmi-narmi , de miy er mak karieiniande la ' ir wniarorni de ir rhi ' oleka do ' a-hala . La'pa miy e mhi ' do ' a-myap hial la inmi-narmi , de emeknekama mhi ' olek la Yesus Kristus .
Therefore , if food causes my brother to stumble , I will eat no meat forever more , that I do n't cause my brother to stumble . ||| Hade pede la'pa ya'ana-yemnu nariei pia a hya'lu nler la do ' a-hala , de hota a ' g edonna puaran pia a'un owa'an ha'anan mak ha rhoi-rtania de . Yanpa hota a'urieiniande a hya'lu de nler la do ' a-hala ralamni .
Am I not free ? Am I not an apostle ? Have n't I seen Jesus Christ , our Lord ? Are n't you my work in the Lord ? ||| Yanpa mpiarora de ta'en niana aliernohora mak awuarora de naplola ? ! Yanpa mpiaror a ' di de riy mak Yesus Kristus Nhopan pa godia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu atia ' a ' u , yoma miatniekamde a ' g edonna umkek meman ma'ta Yesus Itmatromlawanni de ? ! Yanpa miplin mua'ta la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a tniultulanni-rere'eni mai a ' pua a'ukot nohor E ' la tiy miy pia dodo'ondi de miat niohora E ' a ? !
If to others I am not an apostle , yet at least I am to you , for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord . ||| Matialo'onamde riy dom to ' a rahmena rreiniana-ra'nan a ' pua emeka riy makodia Uplerlawna lirni , mere plollolli de miy di de ta'en niana mpianikli-mpiayotli a ' u . Yoma amueh ' a neka ed mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu tiy miy pia mpiesiaya , ne la ' talan emkade pede Orgahi-Orha ' a Ntutga de a ' die ed mak kodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu a ' u .
My defense to those who examine me is this , ||| La'pa he ' ed maka kiwra kwaghal a ' die hota a ' g ed mak kakot emkadilla ,
Have we no right to eat and to drink ? ||| Plol toto ' a pa nlol talla pa amlernana ya'ana-yemnu la ' a a liwtu-odwu yawahlani toh !
Have we no right to take along a wife who is a believer , even as the rest of the apostles , and the brothers of the Lord , and Cephas ? ||| Me la'pa a ha'wu patke ' a etla de ha nlernan walia yawahlani emkade wali . Onde yanpa la miy wniarormi de taken niana amodia hawa pat mamni pa amora mkar wiut lia a knia'ru dina pa emekwalia Itmatromlawanni Yesus hyalli re nora Petrusa me makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu korni ha rhi ' nan de ? !
Or have only Barnabas and I no right to not work ? ||| Onde la miy wniarormi de enekneka agora Barnabas am meh ' a er maka mak kokan nohora a apun mamni ? !
What soldier ever serves at his own expense ? Who plants a vineyard , and does n't eat of its fruit ? Or who feeds a flock , and does n't drink from the flock 's milk ? ||| Mpiaror teka ! Edon rakota de mak kawunu-ka'ara re rmeh ' a nekpa orgahi ed mak kmakokan nohora ya'ana-yemannu la ' a riy mutlialawanni ira ! Ne edon riwra mak kanhyi ' orwo'-auwo ' ida nawuli-natniamnia orwo ' a-auwo ' a mere edonna na'ana nhyi'ini de mniotni ! La ' walia de edon riwra mak khuri-kwa'ana duma ida edonna nemnia dumni re uhunu turnu !
Do I speak these things according to the ways of men ? Or does n't the law also say the same thing ? ||| Takot nohora hari de it edon tlernohora rimormiori wniarorni , mere la ' Puka nek de e rakot walia .
For it is written in the law of Moses , You shall not muzzle an ox while it treads out the grain . Is it for the oxen that God cares , ||| De la ' a Musa Pukni ralamni de e rakota riwra , Hayor miaka ktepartarlia kwatei-kwahapra metma onde wetra ' lawna totpena ema rkur dodioinia la ' harni , de yana mpiatiehra nurnu , mere miollia pa na'ana metam de . Ina-nara , onnila hya ' pede Uplerlawna Ha Ntar nur lia de ? Onnila Nwaror nohor to ' a hayori ?
or does he say it assuredly for our sake ? Yes , it was written for our sake , because he who plows ought to plow in hope , and he who threshes in hope should partake of his hope . ||| Onde hade ed maka ha rakota la mai rimormior ita ? Yowa ne , e rakot hadella mai ita . Yoma la'pa riy ranhyi ' a ne riy maka kamoga wetra ' lawanni , de hota rhi ' emkade yoma rha'ar aranni de hota rlernana wnioilli-wniahlani la ' a prehenni-maunu . Ne hota emkade wal lia am piali .
If we sowed to you spiritual things , is it a great thing if we reap your fleshly things ? ||| La'pa mak ke'era wini-hgona nek de nreikia wullu-we'elli , yaho'ma am die mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu tiy miy . La'pa amlernana ya'ana-yemnu lawra-raini pa emeka a kniar miamni liwtu-odwa yawahlani la ' miy , de hota emkameni la mpiarora de hade edon naplola ? !
If others partake of this right over you , do n't we yet more ? Nevertheless we did n't use this right , but we bear all things , that we may cause no hindrance to the Good News of Christ . ||| La'pa riy dom to ' a mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu rlernan hare tiy miy die yaho'ma ami mak kakot ulga Uplerlawna lirni tiy miy ? ! Meman nek la Uplerlawna wniayowni de hota amlernan hari la ' miy , mere emkade ho'mana ami edonna malair nohor hare tiy miy die , mere rwaldioinia de ami e mtutulu-mlelew nieka hare honona , yoma uhala yanhi'pa la'pa awuaka a prehenu-ma ' u de hota lira-tunu la Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a Yesus Kristus de nlernana talan mak kler tar lia yawuhi-yawe'eta .
Do n't you know that those who serve around sacred things eat from the things of the temple , and those who wait on the altar have their portion with the altar ? ||| Ina-nara , miat memn oleka de , imam-imam mak kpolu-kwak la Uplerlawna romni ralamni de rlernan yamananni la roma-krei die toh ! De riy mak rala nhioi-tniani la katri'ana wawannu , ha rlernan oke'ela ha'anan maka riy ral de pa rhi ' a la yamananni .
Even so the Lord ordained that those who proclaim the Good News should live from the Good News . ||| Emkade wal lia Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot oleka de , he ' ed mak kakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de , de e ' ed mak klernana yamananni la prehenni-maunu re .
But I have used none of these things , and I do n't write these things that it may be done so in my case , for I would rather die , than that anyone should make my boasting void . ||| Ho'mana mai a ' die , a ' g edonna wuak pa riy rala a prehenu-ma ' u honona re . Ne a ' g edonna gala horat di tiy miy totpena mpiaro'on mai a ' u . Yoma uhal rer lia yanpa la'pa awuak tiy miy die hota a ' g edonna liernan wniatikilgen pia a ralmu nahepru yoma la'pa ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni , de a ' g edonna wuei pia riy rala a liwtu-odwu wniahlani . La'pa a ' g edon liernan wniatikilgeni pa a ralmu nahepru onnila ' hade , de awuak pa amuat niek wa .
For if I preach the Good News , I have nothing to boast about , for necessity is laid on me , but woe is to me if I do n't preach the Good News . ||| La'pa a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni de ta'en niana urehi-ulawna a ino'nu , yoma Uplerlawna ed mak khopna . La'pa a ' g edon ukot nohora de hota aliernan Uplerlawna niukamnu .
For if I do this of my own will , I have a reward . But if not of my own will , I have a stewardship entrusted to me . ||| Mere la'pa mak a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwied de , yoma apuar la ralma-rior wamueh ' u mana hota aliernan a prehenu-ma ' u wniahlani . Mere plollolli de ukot nohora Kot Kalwied de onnila a kwa'ru hade , yoma Uplerlawna ed mak ktut pua agala kniar die .
What then is my reward ? That when I preach the Good News , I may present the Good News of Christ without charge , so as not to abuse my authority in the Good News . ||| Hade emkade de hota rala hya ' a pa emeka a ka'yu ? Mak aliernan de , de ralam hepueparnu yoma la'pa ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota , de a ' g edonna tieku rira pa rpairi a ' u . A ralma-rio'ru de totpa ya'ana-yemnu onde lawra-raini maka plollolli pa hota mak kar lia Uplerlawna kniarni rlernana , de hota awuayotlia totpena yana nhi ' yawuhi-yawe'et la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak a'ukot nohora de .
For though I was free from all , I brought myself under bondage to all , that I might gain the more . ||| Meman nek la a ' di de riy id mana hopopanni atia ' a ' u . La'pa emkade ho'mana , awuehwa-liakat de aghu'ru-ghelam nohora rira honona ralma-riorni totpena aghi ' ino'nu de emekwalima ata-wa'ar la ' a riy honona . Aghi ' emkade totpena a ' u'unut nana riy harahu meman pa rler la mormiori-lewlewna ralamni .
To the Jews I became as a Jew , that I might gain Jews , to those who are under the law , as under the law , that I might gain those who are under the law , ||| Yoma la ' a Yahudi gaini ralamni de aghi ' a ino'nu de emekneka Yahudi . Aghi ' emkade totpena a ' u'unut nana ir pa rler la Yesus Kristus limni ralamni . Yoma la ' a riy mak kmor niohora Musa deullu-tatarni de atiolliohor ira de emekwalima a ' g e liernohora ira . Meman nek la a ' g edonna gor ira mawniatehra wutu la deulu-tatra agama . Mere aghi ' a emkade totpena aghedga ir pa rler wut lia mak klernohor oleka Yesus Kristus .
to those who are without law , as without law not being without law toward God , but under law toward Christ , that I might win those who are without law . ||| La'pa riy maka Yahudi atia ' a de aghi ' a de emolmolla Yahudi atia ' a mak kaplin niohora Musa deullu-tatarni . Aghi ' emkade totpena aghedu ir pa rlernohora Yesus Kristus . Mere la ' hare honona de edonna nhi ' yawuhi-yawe'et la a ' u la ' a tli'nu-tai'lu la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu riorni-liaini . Mere aghi ' emkade de un lira-gemun waw la Yesus Kristus .
To the weak I became as weak , that I might gain the weak . I have become all things to all men , that I may by all means save some . ||| Adien teman la riy mak kaplin niohora ma'ta rwaliria hya ' ed mak kaplola me hya ' ed mak khala , de a ' g edon ghi ' hya ' ed maka ha rwarora de nhala , totpena aghi ' aruri ir pesiayni . La ' talan emkade pede la a hihi ' u-yapya'pu la haneknek wawannu la ' riy honona totpena emkameni ho'mana aghedg oleka riy dom la ir pa rmai lia mormiori-lewlewna ralamni .
Now I do this for the sake of the Good News , that I may be a joint partaker of it . ||| Aghi ' a-yapia hare honona totpena Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni de , yeher to ' pa riy rpesiaya , ne hota ra'ititar rer lia liawanni , totpena hota agor rewre'wa ir pa mlernana Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu la ' a Kot Kalwied de .
Do n't you know that those who run in a race all run , but one receives the prize ? Run like that , so that you may win . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy e miat niohora la ' a yakirna-yawakra wniarehi la yawlari de mak kiwra kawlari honona rre'ela rawlari , mere mak klernan siewa-kai die hota riy id tututu . Hota emkade wal lia miy die , miatu mhiaran reri miemna maka mihniari la ' a Uplerlawna de emeka mak kawlari nawlar toto ' memna , totpena miy miana mliernana siewa-kai maka hota Uplerlawna Nala .
Every man who strives in the games exercises self-control in all things . Now they do it to receive a corruptible crown , but we an incorruptible . ||| La riy maka ha rwatutga pa niwra nler la wniarehi la ' hya ' a to ' a perlombaan mana , natga inonni halolola la wniarehi yala'ani totpena na'untu . Ha nlernohora wniarehi yala'ani yoma la ' a wniarorni de na'oin nana hota rala siewa-kai . Mere edon nalo'on wali ne siewa-kai die nmolu . Mere itodia it inonni la plol wawna la ' a haneknek wawannu yoma ita'oin nana hota itlernana siewa-kai maka Uplerlawna Nala . Siewa-kai die edon nmolu mere nden nek la pa nodia liarni .
I therefore run like that , not aimlessly . I fight like that , not beating the air , ||| La ' hade pede a ' die a ' g emolmolan nekama mak kawlari ida mak kharan nana memna maka nahniari , onde emekwalima mak kwata ' u rurni-laini la wniadupla-wniahia'ala pa edonna nwadupal lol to ' etnu-liolli .
but I beat my body and bring it into submission , lest by any means , after I have preached to others , I myself should be disqualified . ||| A ' g emolmolan nekama riy mak khoi tiarga inonni pa rtu'tu-rlewria de ral toto ' meman la totpena inonni namnotna , totpa hota enlernana siewni-kaini . Me emekwalima aghi ' walia a ino'nu pa emeka upa-matroma nhi ' a la atni-wa'arni . Aghi ' emkade totpena yanpa ukot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu della ' rira , mere hota nwaldioinia pa nler la hohoni de Uplerlawna Nwayotlia a ' pua a ' g edon liernana sie'wu-ka'yu .
Now I would not have you ignorant , brothers , that our fathers were all under the cloud , and all passed through the sea , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mhioratreria hya ' maka it upni-tgarni rhi ' oleka la ' lerni rlernohor reria Musa . Rala ' lola kakma ida nayanni ne rleretia Hletan Mermera de rlola mounu-wahrani .
and were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea , ||| Ne la'pa hare honona rewre'wa pa rala ' a la kakma nayanni me gera tah ' i lawan de ralamni , de emeknekama rharani olek ir rla ' a Musa limni-rorni .
and all ate the same spiritual food , ||| Honona rewre'wa pa rlernana yamanna maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nala .
and all drank the same spiritual drink . For they drank of a spiritual rock that followed them , and the rock was Christ . ||| Honona re rewre'wa pa remnia gera maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nala la ira . Ger de nwau liola watu wo ' a ida . Watu wo'or de na'erit nohora Yesus Kristus e ' inhatta , mak kor ir talla .
However with most of them , God was not well pleased , for they were overthrown in the wilderness . ||| La'pa emkade ho'mana yoma ira wniehwani-liakatni pede Uplerlawna ralamni edonna nala rira liawanni la ira . Ne la ' hade pede Uplerlawna Nwunu-nwenna ir la ' meni-meni to ' a narieiniande riy mak kmati re , de hoi-lie'era lol etnu-liolli la wo'orletna-kawurloini .
Now these things were our examples , to the intent we should not lust after evil things as they also lusted . ||| Ina-nara , hare honona de rhi ' a tui ida la ita totpena twahniorta totpena yana it ralamni nko ' i reria yohya ' mak kyata , emeka ir rhi ' nana .
Do n't be idolaters , as some of them were . As it is written , The people sat down to eat and drink , and rose up to play . ||| Yan itsi ' emek riy dom la ira pa tru ' u-ttowar la uplera-upmati . Itat niohora ha rhi ' emkade , yoma la ' Puka ralamni de niwra , La hair de rimormiorni de namtatan pa na'ana-nemnu nhor diewade loloi-hekek nohora uplera-upmatni .
Let 's not commit sexual immorality , as some of them committed , and in one day twenty-three thousand fell . ||| Me yan itlernohora ira yalira-yaliaini mak ir mutwualli dom ha rhi ' oleka wa , mak karieiniande rimormiori riwnu terampworu wehrani wotelu la ira , rmat lia lera ida , la ' a hihi'ini-yapyapni re .
Let 's not test Christ , as some of them tested , and perished by the serpents . ||| Yan ittot pa ta'aga Orgahi-Orha ' a pa emekneka riy dom la ira , pa nhi'nande niy nihiya ira nhi'nande rmati .
Do n't grumble , as some of them also grumbled , and perished by the destroyer . ||| Yana miltieri yata emeknekama riy dom la ira mak kreiniande Uplerlawna Nhopna hopopanni mak kodi plolli la riy aranni nwenan nana re .
Now all these things happened to them by way of example , and they were written for our admonition , on whom the ends of the ages have come . ||| Hare honona de iramkek memna totpena emekwalima hya ' mak tamkek oleka pa yana tlernohora . Ne hare honona de e rhorat tar wual lia , totpena ita mak kmor lia lera-mel maka kwakriarian wia la lera-mel noha niatni twahniorat la it inonni .
Therefore let him who thinks he stands be careful that he does n't fall . ||| La ' hade pede miy miaka edonna katiak reria hihi'imi-yapyapmi yoma mpiarora miy pesiaymi de naruri-nalai miemn olekwa , de erammi la temmi , yanpa hota mlier la totota-wudwiudi ralamni pa mhi ' do ' a-myap hiala .
No temptation has taken you except what is common to man . God is faithful , who will not allow you to be tempted above what you are able , but will with the temptation also make the way of escape , that you may be able to endure it . ||| La ' totota-wudwiudi maka mliernana de emekwalima maka nhi'inde rimormiori ha rlernan oleka wa . Mere Uplerlawna Ndenrer pia Ntulan tiy miy . Hota E ' edonna Nolin doin limni la miy pia totota-wudwiudi narehia miy rurmi-laimi . Mere la'pa mlier la totota-wudwiudi dewade Enal walia talan tiy miy , totpena miruri-milai .
Therefore , my beloved , flee from idolatry . ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara mak kden rer lia a ralmu , awuak tiy miy die oliet miy la riu ' u-tniowra la uplera-upmati .
I speak as to wise men . Judge what I say . ||| A ' g e ultier tiy miy di , de emekneka a ' g e ultier lia riy mak katu kwarora-kwalai samomuou ida . Pede awuak de miwierta-mitail kalwiedwed la a li'ru-tu'nu ri honona .
The cup of blessing which we bless , is n't it a sharing of the blood of Christ ? The bread which we break , is n't it a sharing of the body of Christ ? ||| La ' lerni ita'ala Yesus larni mak ha rhuria anggur la me ta'uli-tawedia Uplerlawna , de itsoratreria Yesus Kristus rarni . Miplinga de it hihi'ini de ha ntutga de it rewre'wa tor oleka Yesus Kristus de tla ihru ida-ralm ida , yoma la ' a E rarni maka rhur lia it rerieini ? ! Ne la ' walia itwahakra rot die pa ita'an rewre'wa , de miplinga de tor rewre'wa E ' pa inon ida ? !
Because there is one loaf of bread , we , who are many , are one body , for we all partake of the one loaf of bread . ||| Yoma hota ntuin tar lia rot mieha de . Ne la ' rot die pa it hononita traut la pa ita'an la , pede it honon twal lia inona ida .
Consider Israel according to the flesh . Do n't those who eat the sacrifices participate in the altar ? ||| Ina-nara , mpiaror tek la riy Israel re la'pa ral nhioi-tniani la Uplerlawna la ' a katri'ana wawannu nhor diewade rewre'wa pa ra'an ha'anan maka ha ral de . Miplinga de ira'an hade ha nnia'eratni de ir rewre'wa pa ror Uplerlawna rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida ? !
What am I saying then ? That a thing sacrificed to idols is anything , or that an idol is anything ? ||| La'pa a'ukot emkade yanpa mpiarora de maka ha rodia la uplera-upmati re de nodi unut hadom la rimormiori onde uplera-upmatni rurni-laini etla .
But I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice , they sacrifice to demons and not to God , and I do n't desire that you would have fellowship with demons . ||| Edonna ! Mere la ' a hya ' maka ha rodia la ' a gen miaka ha riwa rala la uplera-upmatni re de edonna rodia harella Uplerlawna , mere ral harella hegana-kawnu yatni-rha'ani . Ne a'uhmen pa mlier wut lia hegana-kawnu re .
You ca n't both drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons . You ca n't both partake of the table of the Lord and of the table of demons . ||| Pede miy mior olek Orgahi-Orha ' a mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida yoma miemn oleka Orgahi-Orha ' a larni me mi'ina rotni , de yan memmemna mior hegana-kawnu mlia ' lir ida yoma mi'ina-miemnu hya ' maka ha rala la uplera-upmati . Hade edon naplol la makpesiay Uplerlawna .
Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy ? Are we stronger than he ? ||| Onde yanpa itiwa tahak pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Nahankeran rer mai ita ? ! Mpiarora de miy rurmi-laimi rreh dioinia Orgahi-Orha ' a pede hota edonan Nukum miy ? !
All things are lawful for me , but not all things are profitable . All things are lawful for me , but not all things build up . ||| Nhi'inde riy riwra , Amhi ' neka hya ' to'owa maka amparora de naplola . Mere a'ukota de , La ' hare honona re edonna rtulan la miy . Riy riwra , Hota amhi ' neka haneka-harahu wuawannu , mere a'ukota de , Honona re edonna rod miy pesiaymi la ga ' a .
Let no one seek his own , but each one his neighbor 's good . ||| Yana riy ida nwehwa-nlakat de e nlernohor to ' e wniaror wamueheni , mere nwehwa-nlakta de nhoratrer wialia hya ' ed maka hota kodi e rimormior wialli pesiayni la ga ' a .
Whatever is sold in the butcher shop , eat , asking no question for the sake of conscience , ||| Pede hota miy mi'ina hya ' to ' maka miwelia la ' a ya'olgeni . Mere yana mpiata'wa mitian nohora hya ' maka ha miwra mi'ina miwra , Ral oleka ha'anan de la uplera-upmati me edonna ? Nhi'inde riy ratian emkade yoma rwaror nohora de la'pa ra'an hade , de rhi ' oleka do ' a-hala .
for the earth is the Lord 's , and its fullness . ||| Mere yana mpiaror nohora hade , yoma e rhorat targa la Puka de riwra , Nohkeran di nor wutga mniotni de Orgahi-Orha ' a gahani hade .
But if one of those who do n't believe invites you to a meal , and you are inclined to go , eat whatever is set before you , asking no questions for the sake of conscience . ||| Pede la'pa mak edonna kpesiay mia'ta ida nhoi lia pa mi'ina , me mpiayow pa mlia ' a , de yana mpiayotlia ya'an de ne mi'ina . Yana mpiata'wa hya ' ed maka ha miwra mi'in de yoma miy mpiaror nohora la ' a ralammi de , yanpa mi'in hade de nhala .
But if anyone says to you , This was offered to idols , do n't eat it for the sake of the one who told you , and for the sake of conscience . For the earth is the Lord 's , with all its fullness . ||| Mere la'pa riy riwra , Maka miy miwra mi'ina re de nhioi-tniani korni-tre'eni hare , de yan mi'ina , yoma msiaynia riy de maka ralma-rior wamueheni nakot hade nhala .
Conscience , I say , not your own , but the other 's conscience . For why is my liberty judged by another conscience ? ||| Meman nek la miy edon mpiarora hade nhala mere mliernohora e lir wamueheni mak kakota hade de nhala . Mere yanpa riy id tiy miy niwra natian a ' u niwra , Hya ' a nrei pia a ralma-rio'ru de riy rpolliohora ? !
If I partake with thankfulness , why am I denounced for something I give thanks for ? ||| Yoma a ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna la yamanan de nhor diewade a'una , noka hya ' a nrei piede riy rwaghala a lia ya'ana-yemun dena , kennama asiumbain pa wuak olek kalwieda la Uplerlawna ? !
Whether therefore you eat or drink , or whatever you do , do all to the glory of God . ||| Mere ina-nara ama-hyali , a'ukot tiy miy die la ' a hya ' maka miwra mhi ' a , la'pa mi'ina onde miemnu , de mhi ' a totpena hare honona de rodia ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
Give no occasion for stumbling , whether to Jews , to Greeks , or to the assembly of God , ||| Yanpa hya ' maka ha mhi ' a re narieiniande riy rler la do ' a-hala ralamni . La'pa Yahudi onde Yahudi atia ' a , la ' wal lia ' krei mutnu pepanni mana yana mhi ' emkadella .
even as I also please all men in all things , not seeking my own profit , but the profit of the many , that they may be saved . ||| Mliernohor a yeh'wu . Yoma aniaduran pa atiutga kalwiedni-paitiotni la ' a hya ' to ' a totpena riy honona ralamni rahepur pa ir pesiayni yeher to ' a pa naruri-nalai wia onnila a hihi ' u-yapya'pu re honona . A ' g edonna ghorat la inon wamueh ' u . Awuarora honona kalwiedni-paitiotni totpena rler la mormiori-lewlewna ralamni .
Be imitators of me , even as I also am of Christ . ||| Mliernohora a yeh'wu pa emekwalima aliernohora Yesus Kristus .
Now I praise you , brothers , that you remember me in all things , and hold firm the traditions , even as I delivered them to you . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , a ' u'uli miy yoma miy e mhioratreria a yeh'wu me wniatutu-wniaye ' a maka ha rala mai a ' u noma awuatutu-wuaye ' tiy miy , ne miy e mliernohora re .
But I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ , and the head of the woman is man , and the head of Christ is God . ||| Mere agiwra ukota totpena miat wualia la ' hadi , de la ' a maka khi ' o'tani la patke ' a de muanke ' a . Ne mak khi ' a o'tani la a'na muanke ' a de Yesus Kristus . Ne makhi ' o'tani la Kristus de Uplerlawna .
Every man praying or prophesying , having his head covered , dishonors his head . ||| Ne la'pa muanke ' a ida nsumbaini onde la'pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Enalharia , la ' woka-le ' lialawna , ne nnairia karpusa , de rwet hadella riy maka kapolu-kaliella e o'tani de Yesus Kristus .
But every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered dishonors her head . For it is one and the same thing as if she were shaved . ||| Ne la'pa patke ' ida nsumbaini onde la'pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak Enalharia la e ' a la ' a krei wokni-le'enu ne edonna nnairia tutullu , de rweta riy della pat maka kamola-kama ' a muanke ' a mak khi ' o'tani la e ' a . Hade emekwalima patke ' yatyat mak ki'ir oleka moratnu pa ntutga nhiolli yata .
For if a woman is not covered , let her hair also be cut off . But if it is shameful for a woman to have her hair cut off or be shaved , let her be covered . ||| Pede la'pa patke ' ida nahmena nnairia tutullu de ndella pa hota rtor dioin nek moratnu . Mere la'pa rtori patke ' id moratnu onde ri'ir doinia wuwannu , de yamola-yama ' id hadella e ' a , la ' hade pede plolli de patke ' a re rnairia tutullu .
For a man indeed ought not to have his head covered , because he is the image and glory of God , but the woman is the glory of the man . ||| Mere a'na muanke ' a de yana rnairia karpusa , yoma enamemia Uplerlawna la e inon wamueheni yoma enodi plolli pa emekwali Uplerlawna . Yoma e ' a , pede riy ra'uli-rawedi Uplerlawna . Mere a'na patke ' a de hota nnairia tutullu totpa riy ra'uli a'na muanke ' a .
For man is not from woman , but woman from man , ||| Yoma la ' ler ululu de a'na muanke ' de edonna ra ' nana la ' patke ' a . Mere patke ' a ed maka ha ra ' nana la a'na muanke ' a ruh'anu .
for man was n't created for the woman , but woman for the man . ||| Muanke ' a mana edonna rhi ' a totpena nhima-nre ' patke ' a , mere rhi ' a patke ' de totpena nhima-nre ' muanke ' a .
For this cause the woman ought to have authority over her own head , because of the angels . ||| La ' hade pede patke ' a ida , de nnairia tutullu totpena ntutga de e etla muanke ' a limni ralamni , totpena Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikat mak kamkek reri mana rahepru .
Nevertheless , neither is the woman independent of the man , nor the man independent of the woman , in the Lord . ||| La ' hade ho'mana , la ' a it mak kor oleka Orgahi-Orha ' a tla ' lir ida , de patke ' a , muanke ' a pa it idma nhima-nre ' ida .
For as woman came from man , so a man also comes through a woman , but all things are from God . ||| Yoma la ' ler ululu de Uplerlawna Na ' nana patke ' a upni-tgarni de la muanke ' a ruh'anu , la'pa emkameni ho'mana la ' ler de pa nma ntut lia ler di mana , patke ' a ed mak kmor niana muanke ' a honona re . Irora la'pa haneka-harahu wuawannu honona rwatiawua Uplerlawna .
Judge for yourselves . Is it appropriate that a woman pray to God unveiled ? ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miwierta-mitail tek hadina . Nhi'inde patke ' a ida nsumbain la Uplerlawna la mutlialawna , mak lol talanni de totpena nnairia o'tani tutullu toh !
Does n't even nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair , it is a dishonor to him ? ||| Mpiaror tek la ' a riy rahu yamkekni de muanke ' a maka moratnu plahwa de nodia yamola-yama ' a toh !
But if a woman has long hair , it is a glory to her , for her hair is given to her for a covering . ||| Mere la ' a pat maka moratnu plalahwa de riy ra'uli . Yoma Uplerlawna Nala mortu plalahwa la e ' pa emeka tutullu .
But if any man seems to be contentious , we have no such custom , neither do God 's assemblies . ||| La ' hade pede , riy riwra rawo'or nohor hade , de a li'ru niwra ami onde krei dom to ' mutnu , a hononami die rewre'wa pa mhi ' emkade mamaini .
But in giving you this command I do n't praise you , because you come together not for the better but for the worse . ||| Ina-nara , la ' a mak itiwra takot nohora di , a ' g edonna u'ul miy yoma miy yawokmi pa mkiola tieru-miawur nehla la Uplerlawna , de edonna nodia miy la kalwiedwedni mere nodi miy lia yatyatni .
For first of all , when you come together in the assembly , I hear that divisions exist among you , and I partly believe it . ||| Wokmi-le'emi emkade narieiniande to ' a-tai miy . La ' hade pede dodo'ondi de agiwra ukot nohora . Yoma a'utlin nan oleka miy yehwami emkade nareiniande awuarora de maka utlina re yanpa ha raplola .
For there also must be factions among you , that those who are approved may be revealed among you . ||| Meman neka miy to ' a-tai miy emkade totpena hota tamkek la ha meni ed mak kaplola la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
When therefore you assemble yourselves together , it is not the Lord 's supper that you eat . ||| Emkade ho'mana a ' g edon u'ul miy yoma la lera ha miwok pa mi'in la Orgahi-Orha ' a meini wawannu , de mpiehwa-mliakat de emeknekama Orgahi-Orha ' a meini atia ' a ed maka ha mi'in la de .
For in your eating each one takes his own supper first . One is hungry , and another is drunken . ||| Yoma la'pa mi'in wa de rima-rima mpiaruiya yamananmi , nhi'nande riy doma edonna rlernana ya'ana kennama dom ra'an nande rpehera-rma'wu .
What , do n't you have houses to eat and to drink in ? Or do you despise God 's assembly and put them to shame who do n't have enough ? What shall I tell you ? Shall I praise you ? In this I do n't praise you . ||| Hya ' ed maka kreiyo ? ! Miy mikleh rom wamueh ' a ? ! Nihya'pa miy edon mi'ina-miemun la handena ? ! Onde yanpa miy e miwra mhi ' amola-ma ' a krei wokni-le'enu , atia ' de mhi ' amola-ma ' a riy mak kakleha kaplara ? ! Hya ' owa'an mak hota a'ukota tiy miy ? Miy mpiarora de hota a ' u'ul miy yehwami rena ? ! A ' g edonna wuayow a o'tu la miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi re !
For I received from the Lord that which also I delivered to you , that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he was betrayed took bread . ||| Yoma a wniatu'tu tiy miy lia ' emkameni la ra'ana-remun la Orgahi-Orha ' a meini , de aliernan harella Orgahi-Orha ' a orgahani . De la ' a mel maka Yudas na'olga Yesus Itmatromlawanni mere edon nhi ' ma'ta de , Yesus Nora riy maka ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re ra'an wutu , noma Yesus Na'ala roti
When he had given thanks , he broke it and said , Take , eat . This is my body , which is broken for you . Do this in memory of me . ||| na'nama orgahani Na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna noma Nhawi-nhawia rot die pa Nhakre'era , na'nama Niwra , Hadi de A ino'nu mak Agala la miy rerieimi . Mi'in hadi totpena nhioratmi nden reri la A matmia'tu pa nodi liarni .
In the same way he also took the cup after supper , saying , This cup is the new covenant in my blood . Do this , as often as you drink , in memory of me . ||| Emkade walia la'pa ra'an pa nhorwua noma Na ' owa'an lari maka rkeni anggur turnu na'nama Niwra , Anggur tur di , A ra'ru mak khi ' aplol nana Uplerlawna nnio ' warwuarnu . La ' ler meni to ' pa miy miemun hadi de mhi ' a re totpena mhioratreria A matmia'tu .
For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup , you proclaim the Lord 's death until he comes . ||| Plola la'pa ler meni-meni to ' pa miy mi'ina roti me miemnia anggur tur die , de miy e mikot nohora Orgahi-Orha ' a matmiatni la'pa ntut lia ler maka Enawali owa'ana .
Therefore whoever eats this bread or drinks the Lord 's cup in a way unworthy of the Lord will be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord . ||| La ' hade pede riy ra'ana Orgahi-Orha ' a rotni me remnia Orgahi-Orha ' a niemannu de rlernohora yehwani mak edon kla ' nana Orgahi-Orha ' a ralamni , de riy de nhi ' do ' a-hal olek la Orgahi-Orha ' a yoma rakleha yatota-yawawa la E inonni me rarni .
But let a man examine himself , and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the cup . ||| Hade pede rima-rima nloha-nlili pleinia inonmi nanpena mi'ina-miemun la Orgahi-Orha ' a meini .
For he who eats and drinks in an unworthy way eats and drinks judgment to himself if he does n't discern the Lord 's body . ||| Yoma la'pa riy ra'ana-remun la Uplerlawna meini ne rakleha yatota-yawawa la ' a roti nor anggur maka rnawalia la Orgahi-Orha ' a inonni nor rarni maka Enala la it rerieini , de riy de e na'ana-nemun nan oleka niukamnu mak hota Uplerlawna Nala pa ntutulu-nakwara .
For this cause many among you are weak and sickly , and not a few sleep . ||| Hade ed mak kariei pia la ' miy die , riy rahu rler la nnieni-nhiena pa riy harahu re pala matia .
For if we discerned ourselves , we would n't be judged . ||| Mere itatu tlili-tloha it inonni ulu , de hota it edonna tler la Uplerlawna niukamnu .
But when we are judged , we are disciplined by the Lord , that we may not be condemned with the world . ||| Mere la'pa Uplerlawna Nukum it la dodo'ondi , de Nal it pa tler la mehra-mau onde tmati , de emolannekama Enliwr ita , totpena yana itor wutga rimormiori nohkerna mak edonna kpesiay , pa hota tler la niukum lawna pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni .
Therefore , my brothers , when you come together to eat , wait for one another . ||| La ' hade pede , i'nu-na'ru , la'pa miwok pa mi'in la Orgahi-Orha ' a meini , de miy idma nwei ida .
But if anyone is hungry , let him eat at home , lest your coming together be for judgment . The rest I will set in order whenever I come . ||| La'pa he ' e naplara , de na'ana plein la romni nayanni nanpena la na'an la Uplerlawna meini wawannu . La'pa miatu mhiu'ru-mhielam nohora Uplerlawna meini wawannu , de hota kreimi-iskolmi edonna nodia miy lia do ' a-hala pa mlier la niukamnu . A nnio ' a-nia'tu dom pali pena amuai pa a'ukot nohora tiy miy ne mpiei nieka .
Now concerning spiritual things , brothers , I do n't want you to be ignorant . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , agiwra miat niohor memna la ' a ra ' a-palu maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nala de yala'ani .
You know that when you were heathen , you were led away to those mute idols , however you might be led . ||| Mhioratreria la lerni la miy edonna miat niohor ma'ta Orgahi-Orha ' a , de miy e mitlin la yapi ' u-yaga ' u pa mliernohora riy mak kru ' u-ktowar la uplera-upmati makla ' atiehra mak ktilu-kmanu pa mhi ' a la rupni-rupni hya ' to'owa .
Therefore I make known to you that no man speaking by God 's Spirit says , Jesus is accursed . No one can say , Jesus is Lord , but by the Holy Spirit . ||| Onnila ululu de miy e mhi ' emkade pede dodo'ondi a'ukot hadi totpa miat niohora talla maka mliernohora pa mniaheri-mniahelta hameni ed mak Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli . De riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la , de riy de ta'en niana napolu-naliella Yesus . Riy id mana edon nlernohor reria Yesus emeka e Matromlawanni atiaru Uplerlawna Nhiwni etla riy de ralamni .
Now there are various kinds of gifts , but the same Spirit . ||| Ina-nara , ra ' a-palu miaka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nala re to ' a-taiya , mere ha rwatiawua Uplerlawna Nhiw memeheni ida .
There are various kinds of service , and the same Lord . ||| Tulla-kniari to ' a-taiya pa ta tsima-tre ' a Itmatromlawanni mere Itmatromlawanni mak itsima-tre ' de Riy memeh ' a de .
There are various kinds of workings , but the same God who works all things in all . ||| Tulla-kniari la Itmatromlawanni de yala'ani harahu mere mak kala ruri-lai la riy mak kar die , de Uplerlawna orgahani owa'ana .
But to each one is given the manifestation of the Spirit for the profit of all . ||| Makpesiay honona rlernana ruri-lai mak kwatiaga Uplerlawna Nhiwni , maka nawniatniatia riy nenenna totpena hota la ' hade pede it hononita tler la kalwiedni onnila it idma ntulan la ida .
For to one is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom , and to another the word of knowledge according to the same Spirit , ||| La ' riy ida de Nhiw die Nala ruri-lai totpena nakot nohora kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna . La ' dom to ' a de Nhiw die owa'an pa Nala ruri-lai totpena nakot nohora Uplerlawna yala'ani , de riy rna'erit nana .
to another faith by the same Spirit , and to another gifts of healings by the same Spirit , ||| Nhiw memeh de wal pia Nal wal lia ruri-lai la riy id to ' wali pa narur lia pesiayni la Yesus Kristus , ne la ' dom to ' a , de Nhiw die Nala ruri-lai pa nhi ' kalwieda riy mak kamehra-kamau .
and to another workings of miracles , and to another prophecy , and to another discerning of spirits , to another different kinds of languages , and to another the interpretation of languages . ||| La riy doma de Nala ruri-lai pa nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat , ne la ' doma de Nala pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Uplerlawna Nalhari oleka la e ' a . La ' dom to ' de Nhiw die Nodia ralma-riora pa na naheri-nahelta hameni maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nala onde hameni mak edonna . E Nal walia ruri-lai pa na naltieri de yawala maka taplinga , ne dom pal die ratu rakot nohora yawala re nnia'eratni .
But the one and the same Spirit produces all of these , distributing to each one separately as he desires . ||| Hare honona de , Nhiw memeh de owa'an pa kniarni hare . Rima-rima rlernana Uplerlawna rurni-laini de rlernohora Nhiw die ralma-rior wamueheni .
For as the body is one and has many members , and all the members of the body , being many , are one body , so also is Christ . ||| Ina-nara , twalliohor tek la ! La ' it inonni di , de inona ida mere nawniair la lima-laka irnu-mata la'pa tutu ' u-nerniernu honona . Hare honona etla inona ida . Emkade wal lia makpesiay . Riy harahu mere itawniair la inona ida de Yesus Kristus .
For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body , whether Jews or Greeks , whether bond or free , and were all given to drink into one Spirit . ||| Yoma la ' ler maka rharani ita , la'pa riy Yahudi , la ' walia maka Yahudi atia ' a , ata-wa'ara , la ' walia marna-wuhura , de it hononit di , de er mak Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nhi ' a pa tla ' liewr ida pede emolmolan nekama Yesus Kristus inonni inhatta . Ne E Nhiwni memeh de ed maka Uplerlawna Nala pa Ndella it hononita ihranu ralamni .
For the body is not one member , but many . ||| Ina-nara , tamkek la inona ida . La ' a inon de nmeh ' a , de edonna nawniair la ' a lima-laka ida nmeh ' a , mere lima-laka irnu-mata la'pa tutu ' u-nerniernu korni .
If the foot would say , Because I 'm not the hand , I 'm not part of the body , it is not therefore not part of the body . ||| Yanpa laka ida niwra e ' de lima atia ' a e ' a pede e ' edonna nler wut lia inona . Hade mana edon ntutga de edonna nwatiawua inon de .
If the ear would say , Because I 'm not the eye , I 'm not part of the body , it 's not therefore not part of the body . ||| Onde yanpa tlina nakot la e ' de mat atia ' e ' a pede hota e ' de edonna nwatiawua inon de . Hade mana edonna ntutga de tlin de edonna nwatiawua inon de .
If the whole body were an eye , where would the hearing be ? If the whole were hearing , where would the smelling be ? ||| Mpiaror tek la , la'pa inon tetem de mata honona , de hota emkameni la inon de yatlinni ? ! Onde la'pa inon tetem de tlina honona de emkameni la ya'irannu ? !
But now God has set the members , each one of them , in the body , just as he desired . ||| Mere tamkeka de Uplerlawna ed mak kakoki-kayapia lima-laka irannu-matni re la'pa tutu ' u-nerniernu honona la inona . Ne rima-rima kniarni de rlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
If they were all one member , where would the body be ? ||| La'pa honona re de nwaltiar lia ida nmeh ' a de hota hameni ed maka rhoiya la inona ? !
But now they are many members , but one body . ||| Mere plollolli de lima-laka tutu ' u-nerniernu harahu mere inona de ida nmeh ' a .
The eye ca n't tell the hand , I have no need for you , or again the head to the feet , I have no need for you . ||| La emkade pede mata edon nakot la lima niwra , O ' edon muod unut hadom la inon di . Onde o'ta nakot la laka niwra , O ' edon muodi unut hadom la inon di .
No , much rather , those members of the body which seem to be weaker are necessary . ||| Rwaldioinia de lima-lak tutu ' u-nerniernu mak kakleh ruri la inona , de plola pa hota itnair walia .
Those parts of the body which we think to be less honorable , on those we bestow more abundant honor , and our unpresentable parts have more abundant modesty , ||| Ne lima-laka tutu ' u-nerniernu mak itwarora de edon samoga de , hare er maka tamkek taru kira la samounu . Ne tutu ' u-nerniernu maka yan riy ramkek nana , de itnairia lawra-rainia pa ittutwua .
while our presentable parts have no such need . But God composed the body together , giving more abundant honor to the inferior part , ||| Mere lima-lak tutu ' u-nerniernu maka samog olek la yamkeka , de edonna nla ' nana wniarora-wnialai . Yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kakoki-kayapi it inonni pniadarni pede lima-laka tutu ' u-nerniernu mak edonna naruri-nalai onde yamkekni edon samou , de ramkek samomuou lia pa narehia tutu ' u-nerniernu korni .
that there should be no division in the body , but that the members should have the same care for one another . ||| La ' hade totpena inon de yana ne'era-nhakra mere lima-laka re mana idma namkek la ida .
When one member suffers , all the members suffer with it . When one member is honored , all the members rejoice with it . ||| La'pa lima-laka ida nler la mehra-mau , de plet pa korni re wal pia rakwara mehra de . La'pa rhi ' samomuou lia lima-laka ida , de korni re rkalwied wali .
Now you are the body of Christ , and members individually . ||| Emkade walia miy . Miy hononmi rewre'wa pa mlia ' liewr ida pede miy emolmolan nekama Yesus Kristus inonni miy . Me rima-rima mana kniarmi to ' a-taiya pa emeknekama lima-laka rahu tutu ' u-nerniernu la inona id wali .
God has set some in the assembly , first apostles , second prophets , third teachers , then miracle workers , then gifts of healings , helps , governments , and various kinds of languages . ||| Pa la ' a krei wokni-le'enu , de Uplerlawna Ntutg oleka rima-rima kniarni . Yanullu pertama de maka Yesus Nhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , wornu de mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Enalharia , wotellu de mak kwatutu-kwaye ' a , noma mak khi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat , nhor nioma mak klernana plolli pa nodia mak kamehra la kalwiedni , la'pa mak katu ktulan la rimormior wialli , mak kod gai lia rira liawanni natu na'ursia administrasi , me mak kaltieri pia rnairia yawala-yawala mak itaplinu .
Are all apostles ? Are all prophets ? Are all teachers ? Are all miracle workers ? ||| La ' hare honona re rlernana ruri-lai mak to ' a-taiya . Mere yanpa la miy wniarormi de hare honona rla ' a makodia Uplerlawna lirni . Edonna toh ! ? Hare honona edon rla ' mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Enalharia onde tungkuru-tungkuru . Hare honona edonna rodi plolli pa rhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat ,
Do all have gifts of healings ? Do all speak with various languages ? Do all interpret ? ||| onde totpena rodia kalwieda la mak kamehra-kamau , onde totpena raltieri de rnairia yawala-yawala maka taplinga , onde totpena honona re rakot nohora yawal de nnia'eratni . Rima-rima rurni-laini erla .
But earnestly desire the best gifts . Moreover , I show a most excellent way to you . ||| Mere hota miy ralammi nwak toto ' memna totpena mliernana rurni-laini mak ktulan meman la rimormior wialli . Mere hota la hadi de atiutga talan tiy miy mak samomuou mak karehi ruri-lai re .
If I speak with the languages of men and of angels , but do n't have love , I have become sounding brass or a clanging cymbal . ||| Ina-nara , la'pa riy ida nlernana ruri-lai pa naltier lia rimormiori yawalli maka ha raplinu onde Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu yawalli , mere edonna nhi ' kalwiedweda riy meheni , de lirni re emeka sraki miak kayetin to ' a .
If I have the gift of prophecy , and know all mysteries and all knowledge , and if I have all faith , so as to remove mountains , but do n't have love , I am nothing . ||| Eradonde riy ida nlernana ruri-lai pede natu nakot nohora lira-tun muaka Uplerlawna Nalharia la e ' a , ne nat niohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu loini-talanni maka riy edonna rwaror nana , me pesiayni narur mieman la Uplerlawna pa nwarei wo'ora la walli , mere edonna nhi ' kalwiedweda riy meheni , de riy de edonna la ' hadomdoma .
If I give away all my goods to feed the poor , and if I give my body to be burned , but do n't have love , it profits me nothing . ||| Eradonde riy ida nala re'eni-tniarnu honona re na nara ' a-napalga a'na riy patyata , ne nal walia inonni la ai na'ana . Mere e ' edonna nhi ' kalwiedweda riy meheni , de riy de edon rlernana unut doma .
Love is patient and is kind . Love does n't envy . Love does n't brag , is not proud , ||| Riy maka khi ' kalwiedweda riy meheni , de tamkek la de natu nod niohora e rimormior wialli . Edonna naralmha'ara mere natu nhu'ru-nhelma rimormior wialli la'pa rhi ' yatyatni la ' e ' a , pede nhi ' samomuou lia ira . Me e ralamni edon nala riy gahani . Riy de , edonna nodia po'ona-pei pa nwarehi-nwatal lia mormiorni-dardiarni .
does n't behave itself inappropriately , does n't seek its own way , is not provoked , takes no account of evil , ||| E lirni onde yehwani edonna maklekla , me edonna ntutg okarni pa riy rlernohora e ralma riorni . Riy de edonna pleta-pleta pa nahankeran pa nwarora-nwalai niana yata-hala pa na nwahla rira wniehwani-liakatni .
does n't rejoice in unrighteousness , but rejoices with the truth , ||| Riy mak khi ' kalwiedwed riy meheni , de edonna na'oin nana yatyatni-halalli , mere ralamni na'oin nan to ' a hya ' ed mak kden la plol wawannu .
bears all things , believes all things , hopes all things , and endures all things . ||| Ne hota enatu natahan ralamni la ' haneka-harahu wuawannu . Edon nagai pietan la rimormior wialli mere natu nod niohora . La ' hya'-hya ' to'owa de edon pleta-plet pa natniekamde e rimormior wialli plol toto ' a pa niwra nhi ' yatyat la e ' a . Hota nwak mamain totpena e rimormior wialli nler la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
Love never fails . But where there are prophecies , they will be done away with . Where there are various languages , they will cease . Where there is knowledge , it will be done away with . ||| Nhiolia kalwiedwed de hota nden la pa nodi liarni . Mere ruri-lai honona mak Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nala mai ita la'pa twahaur nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak Enalhari oleka , italtieri yawala-yawala mak itaplinga , itlernana kirkira-ralma-riora la Uplerlawna yala'ani hota honona re edon nden pa nodi liarni .
For we know in part and we prophesy in part , ||| Yoma it lirni-yatnu , kirkira-ralma-riorni maka itnair la ' lera-mela ri , me la'pa ta takot nohora lira-tunu mak Uplerlawna e Nalharia , de hare honona edon raplol ma'ta .
but when that which is complete has come , then that which is partial will be done away with . ||| Hota la'awa la ' ler maka itler la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , nanpena Uplerlawna Nhi ' aplola hya ' a-hya ' to'owa . Ne ruri-lai mak itnair la lera-mela ri , de hota ha molga re , yoma edon raplol ma'ta .
When I was a child , I spoke as a child , I felt as a child , I thought as a child . Now that I have become a man , I have put away childish things . ||| Tamkek nek la ' lera lokmer ma't a ' u , de a'ultier die emekneka lokmera-lokpaumu . A wniarora-wniala'yu de nayalokmer ma'ta . Mere dodo'ondi de aliawan wa . A yaltie'ru me wniaro'ru mak lolioi-hayaiya de usral oleka wa . Emkade wal lia ' ruri-lai re mak Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nala la ' lerni di mak itden ma't la nohkeran di .
For now we see in a mirror , dimly , but then face to face . Now I know in part , but then I will know fully , even as I was also fully known . ||| Miy mpiaror tek la dodo'ondi , de it kirkirni-ralma-riorni , de emolmolan nekama riy mak kamkeka memannu-tatarni mak kpona-kmahu la ' a totmemi . Mere hota la'pa tler la Ilyamou-Watyatoha de itat niohor momuou yoma tamkek memna Uplerlawna . Dodo'ondi de a ' g edonna gat muomuoga . Mere hota la Ilyamou-Watyatoha de agat momuoga pa emekwalia Uplerlawna mana Nat niohor olek walia a ino'nu .
But now faith , hope , and love remain-these three . The greatest of these is love . ||| Pede la ' ler di pa la'pa nodi liarni itsi ' a-tyap rieria lir mantetelu ri , de itpesiay reri Uplerlawna , me tsa'ar reri it aranni la E ' a , me la'pa tsi ' reri kalwieda-paitiota . Mere mak kareh dioinia hare wotelu de totpa tsi ' kalwiedweda it rimormior wialli rora Uplerlawna .
Follow after love and earnestly desire spiritual gifts , but especially that you may prophesy . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mpiaduran meman pa miatu mhi ' kalwiedweda rimormiori wialmi . Ne ralammi nwak toto ' memna pa mrieiniana ruri-lai re la Uplerlawna Nhiwni . Mak kareh mieman de mliernana ruri-lai pa ma mikot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak Enalharia totpena riy rna'erit nana .
For he who speaks in another language speaks not to men , but to God , for no one understands , but in the Spirit he speaks mysteries . ||| Hota miy e mpiak toto ' memna pa mliernan ruri-lai die , yoma riy mak klernan ruri-lai pa nwahaur de nnairia yawala mak edonna tna'erit nana bahasa Roh , de riy de edonna nwahaur la rimormiori , mere hade e nwahaur to'ola Uplerlawna . Riy dom mana edonna rna'erit nana ha lirni , mere la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiwni pede enakot nohora lir maka Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Natga mere riy raplin niohora .
But he who prophesies speaks to men for their edification , exhortation , and consolation . ||| Rwaldioinia de riy mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak Uplerlawna Nalharia la e ' a , totpena hota riy rna'erit nana , de hota lirni de ennairi pa na naruri-nalai makpesiay , me na nhi ' ir pa rahepru me nod ir pesiayni la ga ' a .
He who speaks in another language edifies himself , but he who prophesies edifies the assembly . ||| Pede riy mak kaltier pia knairia yawala maka riy raplinu , de lira re ha rhi ' arur tio ' a ir orgahi irmeh ' a . Mere riy mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , de ntulan la krei wokni-le'enu totpena la ' ga ' a .
Now I desire to have you all speak with other languages , but even more that you would prophesy . For he is greater who prophesies than he who speaks with other languages , unless he interprets , that the assembly may be built up . ||| Eh ! Agiwra totpa hononmi miltier die miala yawal mak riy raplinu . Mere samounu de , mikot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu totpa riy rna'erit nana . Yoma Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka ha rakot nohora totpa riy rna'erit nana de narehia lira-tun muaka ha rakot nohor de rnairia yawala maka riy raplinu , enekneka lira-tunu die , de orgahi nakot nohora nnia'eratni totpena ntulan la krei wokni re .
But now , brothers , if I come to you speaking with other languages , what would I profit you unless I speak to you either by way of revelation , or of knowledge , or of prophesying , or of teaching ? ||| Ina-nara , mimkek nek la'pa a maimia'yu di pa agodia yawala-yawala maka riy raplinu tiy miy , de hota hade nakleh memna perkuna kuku ' tiy miy . Ematia ' a amua ukot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu tiy miy mak Enalhari oleka mai a ' u , onde awuatutu-wuaye ' miy lia talan plollola onde ukot tiy miy totpena wniarormi-wnialaimi la ' a Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni re na'ititar rer lia .
Even lifeless things that make a sound , whether pipe or harp , if they did n't give a distinction in the sounds , how would it be known what is piped or harped ? ||| Tawalliohora emeka tiwla-prai la'pa hya'-hya ' to ' a maka ha ralira pa ra rwatunu-rwahniara mak kakleha arna , emekwali floiti . La'pa joranni la'pa yetanni tahe'iya pa edon naplola , de emkameni la riy rat niohora hya ' ed maka twahniar dena ? !
For if the trumpet gave an uncertain sound , who would prepare himself for war ? ||| Yawalliohorni id owa'ana , la'pa mak ka'ara rega noknoka mere edon rega pa naplola , de he ' wal pia nat niohora ntutu-nte ' olek la lerni pa rwaran pa nler la ar ralma ? !
So also you , unless you uttered by the tongue words easy to understand , how would it be known what is spoken ? For you would be speaking into the air . ||| Emkade walia la'pa miala yayohi-yaltieria maka riy raplinu , hota riy id mana edonna rna'erit nan et miemna hya ' mak ha mikotkota . Lirmi-tunmi re hota hamamuamua , me edonna lol talan mak kaplola .
There are , it may be , so many kinds of languages in the world , and none of them is without meaning . ||| Mpiaror tek la , la ' nohkeran di , de yawala-yawala harahu , mere la ' yawala re honona de e rodia nnia'eratni wali toh !
If then I do n't know the meaning of the language , I would be to him who speaks a foreigner , and he who speaks would be a foreigner to me . ||| Mere la'pa a ' g edonna nia'erit nana riy id yawalli , de emekwalima a ' die dakna id la e ' a me emekwalima e ' mana dakan wali a ' u la e ' a pa idma edon nna'erit nan ida .
So also you , since you are zealous for spiritual gifts , seek that you may abound to the building up of the assembly . ||| Pede mpiak pa mliernana ruri-lai pia mikot nohora Uplerlawna lirni maka Enalharia de totpa riy rat niohora nnia'eratni . Yoma a'umkek tiy miy die , miy e mpiadieh ' a pa mliernana ruri-lai mak Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nala re . Mere ononni meman de mihak pa mliernan ruri-lai miak kodia krei mutnu pa rla ' ga ' a yoma rna'erit nana lirmi-tunmi re .
Therefore let him who speaks in another language pray that he may interpret . ||| La ' hade pede riy mak kaltier pia knairia yawala maka riy raplinu , de hota nwak la Uplerlawna totpena enlernana ruri-lai pia nakot nohora yawalli de nnia'eratni .
For if I pray in another language , my spirit prays , but my understanding is unfruitful . ||| A'ukot emkade yoma hota la'pa a ' u onde he ' to ' a rsumbain de rnairia yawala maka riy raplinu de meman neka la a ralam mamni ed mak ksumbain de , mere a ralma-rior mamni edon nala ' a , pa ami edon mna'erit nana hya ' ed mak amakota .
What should I do ? I will pray with the spirit , and I will pray with the understanding also . I will sing with the spirit , and I will sing with the understanding also . ||| Hota itsi ' hya ' a ? Hadi ed mak itsi ' a . La'pa la ' gen meni onde ler meni , de la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiwni , pede itsumbain la ' a yawala mak itaplinu mere Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Natga . Ne la ' geni doma onde lera dom nampena itsumbain de it ralma-riorni nala ' pa itna'erit nana momuoga . La ' emkade walia la ' ler id pa itwahniara la yawala maka itaplinu mere hota la ler dom pa itwahniara de it tna'erit nana hya ' ed mak itwahniara .
Otherwise , if you bless with the spirit , how will he who fills the place of the unlearned say the Amen at your giving of thanks , seeing he does n't know what you say ? ||| Itawalliohor owa'ana la'pa hota mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna la krei wokni-le'enu , de miala yawala maka riy raplinu , ne riy mak katlina de edonna nna'erit nana yawal de mak kwatiawu Uplerlawna Nhiwni , pede ta'en niana nweta plola amin la ' miy sniumbainmi de , yoma e ' ta'en niana nna'erit nana hya ' ed mak ha mikotkota .
For you most certainly give thanks well , but the other person is not built up . ||| Meman nek la miy sniumbainmi la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a pa mi'uli-miwedia E ' , de naplola , ho'wal miana sniumbainmi de edonna nperkun la mak katlina re .
I thank my God , I speak with other languages more than you all . ||| Ina-nara , a ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna , yoma amueh ' a nek de ultier die niairia yawala maka riy raplinu pa nareh mieman la miy hononmi .
However , in the assembly I would rather speak five words with my understanding , that I might instruct others also , than ten thousand words in another language . ||| Ho'wal miana , la ' a yawoka-yale ' u pa tkola tieru-tawur nehla Orgahi-Orha ' a , de awueta lira ida-woru rmeh ' a maka riy rna'erit nana , de ha rareh mieman la aniairia lira riwnu-halli re maka riy raplin niohora ha nnia'eratni . A ralmu napranran pa a'ultieri pia niairi yawal mak riy rna'erit nana totpena agala ga wuatutu riy .
Brothers , do n't be children in thoughts , yet in malice be babies , but in thoughts be mature . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yana mniairia ralma-riora lokmera-papay pa mpiaror nohora ruri-lai mak Uplerlawna Nala ri mere mpiaror nohora de emekwalima ina-ama . Ne yana ralammi nko ' i nana yayatni-halalli .
In the law it is written , By men of strange languages and by the lips of strangers I will speak to this people . They wo n't even listen to me that way , says the Lord . ||| Mpiaror tek la hya ' maka e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de riwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhar lirni Niwra , Hota Aniairi yawala maka dakna re ha rakota pa Aga wuahaur la a mu'tu-rah ' u , mere emkade ho'mana hota edonna ratlin la A li'ru-tu'nu re .
Therefore other languages are for a sign , not to those who believe , but to the unbelieving , but prophesying is for a sign , not to the unbelieving , but to those who believe . ||| Pede la ' Puka de lirni de itat niohor memna , de ruri-lai miaka itlernana pa ta taltier die tnairia yawala maka riy raplinu , de hade emekneka kniau lia mak edonna kpesiay totpena iramkek memna Uplerlawna rurni-laini pa rwagahniort ira . Edonna ral hadella makpesiay . Ne ruri-lai maka itlernan pa takot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu totpa rna'erit nana , de rakot nohora hadella riy makpesiay totpa pesiayni la ' ga ' a . Edonna rakot nohora hadella riy mak edonna kpesiay .
If therefore the whole assembly is assembled together and all speak with other languages , and unlearned or unbelieving people come in , wo n't they say that you are crazy ? ||| Pede totpena miat niohora ha meni mak kod riy pesiayni la ga ' a de mpiaror tek la hadi ! La'pa yanpa yawoka-yale ' u dom la krei wokni-le'enu , me miy mak kden hande hononmi mniairia yawala maka riy raplinu , ne plinu-plinnianama riy mak kaplin niohora plollol ma'ta Uplerlawna talanni doma rmai onde riy mak edonna kpesiay mia'ta pa ratlin nana yawala maka riy raplin niohora de , de hota riwra , Eh ! Hare de rpi ' u-rga ' u !
But if all prophesy , and someone unbelieving or unlearned comes in , he is reproved by all , and he is judged by all . ||| Mere la'pa mikota de Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu totpena riy rna'erit nana , pa rhortut nian miy , hota hare honona maka ha mikota re ntut niana ir do'oni-halli , ne hota nhi'nande ir rhoratnana ir do'oni-halli pede rwahniorat la mormiorni .
And thus the secrets of his heart are revealed . So he will fall down on his face and worship God , declaring that God is among you indeed . ||| Hota hya ' maka kayawunum la ir ralamni de orgahi rhoratnana de Uplerlawna Nat niohora momuoga re , pa reiniande rru ' u-rtowra , me ruh ' idma-rrama lia'ar la Uplerlawna pa riwra , Plol toto ' pa Uplerlawna Nor makpesiaya re talla !
What is it then , brothers ? When you come together , each one of you has a psalm , has a teaching , has a revelation , has another language , or has an interpretation . Let all things be done to build each other up . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , hare honona nnia'eratni emkame ? La'pa miwoka-mile ' pua mhi ' a krei-iskola , de rima-rima rurni-laini erla , de doma rwahniara , doma rwatutu-rwaye ' a totpena tat niohora Uplerlawna talanni , doma e rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak Uplerlawna Nalharia la ' ira , doma e rakot nohora de rnairia yawala maka riy raplinga , me doma rakot nohora yawala re nnia'eratni . Mere hare honona de rhi ' totpena rodi it hononit pesiayni la ga ' a .
If any man speaks in another language , let there be two , or at the most three , and in turn , and let one interpret . ||| La'pa doma e riwra raltier lia ' yawala maka riy raplinga , de riy woru onde riy wotelu tututu , pa idma nhernu-nwaug ida . Ne riy id etla pa nakot nohora lir de nnia'eratni .
But if there is no interpreter , let him keep silent in the assembly , and let him speak to himself and to God . ||| La'pa riy edonna rler pa rakot nohora ha nnia'eratni , de riy mak katu kawala maka riy raplinu de muli-mtie'ela la woka-le ' die ralamni . Emkadella pa miy ralammi ed mak kakot nek hadella Uplerlawna .
Let two or three of the prophets speak , and let the others discern . ||| Riy woru onde wotelu tutut pua rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Nalharia la ira , de idma nhernu-nwaug ida , ne korni re hota ratlina me rawerta-ratailia lira re plollolli .
But if a revelation is made to another sitting by , let the first keep silent . ||| Mere la'pa riy id mak kamtatna pa natlin reri , plinu-plinnianamde nlernana Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , de riy maka kaltiertier reri , nho ' taru , totpena riy de naltieri .
For you all can prophesy one by one , that all may learn and all may be exhorted . ||| Hade emkade , onnila miy hononmi miatu mikot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re , idma nhernu-nwauga ida totpena riy honona rlernana wniatutmi-wniaye'emi ne yeher to ' pa miy hononmi pesiaymi naruri-na'orta .
The spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets , ||| Hota mhi ' emkade yoma mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , ratu rodi inonni la plollolli totpena la'pa raltier die lol talanni .
for God is not a God of confusion but of peace , as in all the assemblies of the saints . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna edonna Nwaror nana kokokna-rariarni la ' a krei ralamni mere E ralma-riorni totpa itsi ' honona tlol talanni . Emekneka maka Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu wokni-le'enu honona rhi ' a re ,
Let the wives be quiet in the assemblies , for it has not been permitted for them to be talking except in submission , as the law also says , ||| patke ' a re hota ratu rtulu-rte'ela la ' a woka-le'ga krei . Yana rwayow pa raltieri . Mere hota rdella hawni muanke ' a limni ralamni . Onnila agama deullu-tatarni ed mak kakot olek hadewa .
if they desire to learn anything . Let them ask their own husbands at home , for it is shameful for a wife to be talking in the assembly . ||| La'pa patke'eni re iriwra rat niohora hadomdoma , de mpiei piena hota muanke'emi nakot nohora la ' rom wamuehemi . Yoma la'pa patke ' a ida naltier lia krei wokni-le'enu wniatromni , de hota nhi ' amola-ma ' a enor hawni .
What ! ? Was it from you that the word of God went out ? Or did it come to you alone ? ||| Nihya ' pede miy edon mliernohor a li'ru ri ? ! Uplerlawna lirni ed mak kwatiawu miy ? ! Onde mieh ' a to ' pa er mak klernan oleka Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re ? !
If any man thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual , let him recognize the things which I write to you , that they are the commandment of the Lord . ||| La'pa riy dom e rwarora de ir rlernana ruri-lai la Uplerlawna pa irakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , onde rlernana ruri-lai dom to ' a la Uplerlawna Nhiwni , de hare hota rwayow nohora a li'ru-tu'nu ri ha rwatiawua Uplerlawna .
But if anyone is ignorant , let him be ignorant . ||| Mere la'pa hameni edonna nreiniana-na'nana a li'ru di , de yana nhioratmi ndella riy de !
Therefore , brothers , desire earnestly to prophesy , and do n't forbid speaking with other languages . ||| Yoma hota la ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , ralammi nwahak toto ' meman pa mhi ' a riy mak kakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Mere yana mliarna pa riy rala yawala mak riy raplinu die pa ra raltieri .
Let all things be done decently and in order . ||| Mere hare honona de mhi ' a pa lol talanni .
Now I declare to you , brothers , the Good News which I preached to you , which also you received , in which you also stand , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , dodo'ondi de agiwra ukot nohor owa'an Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna , mak ululu ukot nohor oleka tiy miy die . La ' ler delloo , mrieinian Kot de , me Kot de emeknekama tikilgeni id la miy pesiaymi miak karuri .
by which also you are saved , if you hold firmly the word which I preached to you-unless you believed in vain . ||| La'pa mtiorrer apitga Kot Kalwied de , hota hade ed mak kalewan miy . Mere la'pa mpiesiay hya ' mak edon kaplola , de miy pesiaymi de edon nod unut hadom tiy miy .
For I delivered to you first of all that which I also received , that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures , ||| Yoma hya ' maka aliernana la Orgahi-Orha ' a de a'ukot owa'an tiy miy , de ha ononni meman de Yesus Kristus Nmat lia it do'oni-halli rerieini pa emeka ha rhorat targ oleka la ' Puka ralamni .
that he was buried , that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures , ||| La'pa rtamni olek E wa , nhor nioma Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana E la ' lera wotellu . Hade mana e rakot tar wualia la Puka ralamni .
and that he appeared to Cephas , then to the twelve . ||| Ne la ' ler maka ramoria Yesus owa'ana , de Entutg owa'an rupni la Petrusa , nhor nioma la ' walia mak Enhopan pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re termida wehrani woru .
Then he appeared to over five hundred brothers at once , most of whom remain until now , but some have also fallen asleep . ||| Nhor nioma la ' ler ida de Entutg owa'an rupni la maklernohor E ' a re , riy rahu wolim rehenu . La ' mak kamkek E ' a honona re , de rirahu e rmormior mia'ta , enekneka riy ida-woru rmeh ' a rmati olekwa .
Then he appeared to James , then to all the apostles , ||| Hade nhorwua noma Entutg owa'ana rupni la Yakowsi nhor nioma la ' walia makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re honona .
and last of all , as to the child born at the wrong time , he appeared to me also . ||| La'awa hohoni dewade Entut walia rupni mai a ' u . Mere la ' ler de a'umuki-uma'ala riy makpesiay pede alia ' makodi Uplerlawna lirni de , de a ' g emolmolan nekama papay miaka ha rmoria de nhal wolla maka ratniekamde hota plet pa nmati .
For I am the least of the apostles , who is not worthy to be called an apostle , because I persecuted the assembly of God . ||| A'ukot emkade yoma plollolli de edon lol talla pa rwet a lia makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu yoma umuki-uma'al oleka Uplerlawna mutnu-pepanni wokni-le'enu . Pede a ' die de makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak klol yawa memn a ' u .
But by the grace of God I am what I am . His grace which was given to me was not futile , but I worked more than all of them , yet not I , but the grace of God which was with me . ||| Mere la ' a Uplerlawna sniayanni pede a yeh'wu nakwali pede la'pa dodo'ondi de alia ' mak Yesus Nhopan pa godi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Ne Uplerlawna kalwiedni mai a ' die , edonna lola hamamuamua . Mere akar die nareh miemna a mutwua'lu makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re honona . Mere la ' a plolli de a ' g edonna ghi ' a-yap niana hare honona mere Uplerlawna ed mak kor a ' tialan pa narieiniande hare honona rla ' ga ' a .
Whether then it is I or they , so we preach , and so you believed . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa mliernana Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mai a ' u onde mliernana la ' a makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu dom to ' a , hare honona edonna rla ' lira , mere onni-ga'arni de miy mpiesiay oleka hya ' maka amakot nohora tiy miy .
Now if Christ is preached , that he has been raised from the dead , how do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead ? ||| Amakot oleka tiy miy de Yesus Kristus de ramori owa'an E ' a la matmiatni ralamni , pa nihya'pa la ' riy dom tiy miy de e riwra riy mak kmati re hota edonna ramori owa'ana re ? !
But if there is no resurrection of the dead , neither has Christ been raised . ||| La'pa plola riy mak kmati re edonna ramori owa'ana , nnia'eratni de emekwalima Yesus Kristus nek de edon ramori olek wal lia ' matmiatni ralamni .
If Christ has not been raised , then our preaching is in vain and your faith also is in vain . ||| Ne la'pa edon ramori Yesus Kristus la matmiatni ralamni de hota la ' lir maka amakota re me miy pesiaymi re , hamamuamua yoma mikleha nhia'argeni .
Yes , we are also found false witnesses of God , because we testified about God that he raised up Christ , whom he did n't raise up if it is true that the dead are not raised . ||| La'pa hya ' wal die am die mpal lia mak kputra-kpalka . Yoma la'pa makpesiay re edonna ramori owa'ana , de nnia'eratni de Yesus Kristus mana , Uplerlawna edon Namor owa'an la matmiatni ralamni . Pede la ' ler maka amakota miwra , Uplerlawna Namori Yesus , de ampudi-makla olek miy lia ' a Uplerlawna hihi'ini .
For if the dead are n't raised , neither has Christ been raised . ||| Yoma la'pa riy mak kmati re edon ramori owa'ana , de la ' a Yesus Kristus mana edon ramori owa'an wal lia ' matmiatni ralamni .
If Christ has not been raised , your faith is vain , you are still in your sins . ||| Ne la'pa Yesus edon ramori owa'ana la matmiatni ralamni , de pesiaymi re edon nodi unut hadom tiy miy . Hade emekwalima miy er ma'ta la do ' a-hala ralamni , ne hota miy mmiati pa nodi liarni .
Then they also who are fallen asleep in Christ have perished . ||| Hade emekwalima riy mak kpesiay mak kmati olekwa . Ir mana rrinni olek la ai mormiori ralamni .
If we have only hoped in Christ in this life , we are of all men most pitiable . ||| Ina-nara , riy dom de wniarorni de niwra itsa'ara it aranni de hota Yesus Kristus Nodi unut mai ita mere ntut tio'ola lera-mela mak itdella nohkeran di wawannu . La'pa ir wniarorni de naplola de hota riy makpesiay er maka ruki liawlawan memna . Mere hota edon emkade !
But now Christ has been raised from the dead . He became the first fruit of those who are asleep . ||| Mere plol memna la Yesus Kristus de ramori ulu olek la ' a matmiati ralamni , pede itatga de riy mak kmati olekwa mana hota ramori owa'ana .
For since death came by man , the resurrection of the dead also came by man . ||| Onnila riy ida nakleha tlina-tailla Uplerlawna pede nohkeran di nler la matmiati . Mere riy id owa'an nariei pede rimormior nohkerna hota ramori owa'an la matmiati ralamni .
For as in Adam all die , so also in Christ all will be made alive . ||| Yoma rimormiori honona Adam duratni-waitni , ne hota emekwali Adam mak edon katlin la Uplerlawna lirni , de duratni-waitni it hononita tlernohora e ' pa hota tmati miomuou . Emkade wal lia hota riy honona mak kor Yesus Kristus rla ' ida de hota ramor owa'an it la matmiati ralamni .
But each in his own order , Christ the first fruits , then those who are Christ 's at his coming . ||| Mere hota mak ramori owa'ana de , idma nlernohora ida . Mak kala ' ulu , de Yesus Kristus , nhorwua nanpena twei owa'ana hota Enmai , dewade Uplerlawna Namori owa'an makpesiay ita .
Then the end comes , when he will deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father , when he will have abolished all rule and all authority and power . ||| Nhorwua dewade noha niatni . La ' ler de de hota mak kodi plolli la nohkerna-rai miaran di nor wutga mak kden la lyanti Ili wio'itu-Dari wionema mana Yesus Naru ' u-natowra rurni-laini preheni-mkaini honona . Noma Yesus mak khi ' a Ray Nal owa'ana tnioranni-riautnu della E Amni Uplerlawna .
For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet . ||| Mere edon nte ' ma'ta la ' lera noha niatni de Yesus Kristus hota Nodi plolli la'pa nte'ela lerni maka Enaru ' u-natowar momuoga E arwalli totpena rru ' u-rtowar la E ' a .
The last enemy that will be abolished is death . ||| Ne matmiati die emeknekama arwalli maka raru ' u-ratowra la hohoni meman de .
For , He put all things in subjection under his feet . But when he says , All things are put in subjection , it is evident that he is excepted who subjected all things to him . ||| Itat niohora hade yoma la ' Puka lirni de niwra , Uplerlawna Nhi ' oleka hare honona de hota rru ' u-rtowar la E ' a . Mere Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a to ' pa edonna Nru ' u-ntowar la Yesus Kristus . Mere E ' ed mak khi ' hare honona pa rru ' u-rtowar la Yesus .
When all things have been subjected to him , then the Son will also himself be subjected to him who subjected all things to him , that God may be all in all . ||| Mere la'pa hare honona rru ' u-rtowar la Yesus , dewade Enmemeh ' a nekpa hota Nru ' u-ntowar la Amlawanni Uplerlawna mak karu ' u-katowra oleka hare honona pa kru ' u-ktowar la Yesus . Pede la ' hohoni de Uplerlawna Nmemeh ' a ed mak kodi plolli la hare honona .
Or else what will they do who are baptized for the dead ? If the dead are n't raised at all , why then are they baptized for the dead ? ||| Mere la'pa miy wniarormi mak kiwra mak kmati re hota edonna rmori owa'ana de naplola , de hya ' nrei pia rharania rira la mak kmati re rerieini ? La'pa riy rmat pia nodi liarni hota edon nodi unut pa rhi ' emkade toh ? !
Why do we also stand in jeopardy every hour ? ||| Ne la'pa riy rmat pia nodi liarni de hya ' nrei owa'an pa amiwra mapal lia matmiati la ' lelera-melmela ?
I affirm , by the boasting in you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord , I die daily . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , lera-ler nekpa alier la kropna-krieutu maka trema kod a lia matmiati ralamni mere a'utahan nan a ralmu yoma la ' a Kot Kalwieda rerieini . A'ukot hade naplola ! Yoma emekwali a li'ru maka nhi'inde a'ukota re raplola , de giwra , a ralmu nahepru la ' a miy yoma mpiesiay oleka Itmatromni Kristus Yesus .
If I fought with animals at Ephesus for human purposes , what does it profit me ? If the dead are not raised , then let 's eat and drink , for tomorrow we die . ||| Ne hota la'pa it makpesiay edon tler la yamori owa'ana mere tlernan neka untu la ' nohkeran di to'owa , de hota hya ' ed mak kariei piede alia lier nek la riy yatyata-halala mak kden Epsus pa rhi ' yatyatni mai a ' u ? ! Makden Epsus re emeknekama ohpora-ahdiawra mak klihira-knai a ' u . La'pa riy mak kmati re edonna rmori owa'an de samomuounu de tlernohor neka lir maka nhi'inde ha rakota de riwra , Mai pia ta'ana-temun la'pa itsi ' to ' a hya'-hya ' mak it ralamni ha nko ' i nana yoma repar de itmat wia .
Do n't be deceived ! Evil companionships corrupt good morals . ||| Mere la ' plollolli de hota edon emkade , pede yana mliernohora rira lira wniahaurnu mak edon kaplola re . Mhioratreria ! La'pa miora mutwualmi maka yehwani yata re nhi'inde mihe ' wiutu , de hota irod wali miy lia yatyatni-halalli .
Wake up righteously and do n't sin , for some have no knowledge of God . I say this to your shame . ||| Oi ! Mpiahniorta la dodo'ondi , ne yana mhi ' a do ' a-hala . Plola pa miy dom de edonna rat niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna talanni . A'ukot emkadi totpena mmiola-mmia ' a .
But someone will say , How are the dead raised ? and , With what kind of body do they come ? ||| Matialo'onamde doma edon rpesiaya de hota mak kmati re rmori owa'ana , pa ratiana riwra , Emkameni la ramori owa'an mak kmati ? Hota inon de namkoha-namnanna ne inon meni ed maka ramori owa'ana ?
You foolish one , that which you yourself sow is not made alive unless it dies . ||| Mak kakot emkade podaknu ! Inon mak ha rtamni de lol to ' a la inon mak ha ramoria . Tamkek tek la . La'pa miwra miwuli-mitniamnia wini-hgona id la miy nhyi'imi ralamni , de win die hota edon nmori , la'pa edonna rtamin ulga .
That which you sow , you do n't sow the body that will be , but a bare grain , maybe of wheat , or of some other kind . ||| Ne la'pa miy mtiamin de miy edon mtiamnia wini-hgon de onni me tawni . Mere hya ' maka mtiamin de win-ol de to ' a , la'pa matialo'onama wetra ' lawna onde win diom to ' a .
But God gives it a body even as it pleased him , and to each seed a body of its own . ||| Mere Uplerlawna mak kmeh ' a khi ' a wini-hgon de onni , tawni de yamkekni emolmolla hya ' mak kla ' nana E ralamni . Ne wini-hgona re honona edon nora wini-hgona dom to ' de onni , tawni re ramneha .
All flesh is not the same flesh , but there is one flesh of men , another flesh of animals , another of fish , and another of birds . ||| Hamormiori inonni edonna ramneh momuou . Rimormiori inonni yamkekni , lol to ' a la nhiuri-wnia'ana . Onu-ma'nu mana lol to'am la i'na-ya'ana . I'na-ya'ana mana inonni lol to'am la ' hare honona .
There are also celestial bodies and terrestrial bodies , but the glory of the celestial differs from that of the terrestrial . ||| Emkade wal lia ' haneka-harahu wawannu no ' a lyanti me mak kdella nohkerna wawannu . Makden la lyanti , de rima-rima rodia lipni-kail wamueheni ne mak kden la nohkerna wawannu mana samomuounu ed walia .
There is one glory of the sun , another glory of the moon , and another glory of the stars , for one star differs from another star in glory . ||| Lera lipni-kailli hitni-lomarni lol to'am la wolla lipni-kailli . Ne ha rora lipni-kailli lol to'am la wtiona lipni-kailli . Ne wtiona nek de rod wialia lipni-kail wamueheni .
So also is the resurrection of the dead . The body is sown perishable , it is raised imperishable . ||| Emekwalima hare honona idma lol to'am la ida , de emkade wal lia hota la ' a mak kmati re yamorni owa'an de inon mak ha rtamni de lol to'am la inon maka ha ramoria . Inon mak kdena hoi-kietar de hota ed mak kyata , mere inon mak ramori owa'an de hota edonna niata .
It is sown in dishonor , it is raised in glory . It is sown in weakness , it is raised in power . ||| La ' lera ha rtamin mat die , inon de yamkekni yata yoma plet pa namkoha-namnanna . Mere la'pa ramori owa'an e ' a , inonni nwaldoinia de samomuounu memna . Inon mak kmat die nakleh ruri mere rwaldioinia pa nwal lia inona mak karuri-kalai .
It is sown a natural body , it is raised a spiritual body . There is a natural body and there is also a spiritual body . ||| Inon mak ha rtamnia de ha nwatiawua nohkerna . Mere la'pa ramoria de rlernan inon mak kwatiaga Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli . Emekwalima inon mak kwatiawu nohkerna etla , de emkade wal lia inona mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna etla .
So also it is written , The first man Adam became a living soul . The last Adam became a life-giving spirit . ||| Puka lirni e niwra , Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayap nian Adam riy mak kala ' ulu die totpa nmormiori . Adam de , Adam mak kala ' ulu . Mere Yesus Kristus , maka rweta la Adam mak ktawli'iru , de ramori owa'an E la ' matmiatni ralamni totpa Nal walia mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni la makpesiay E ' a .
However , that which is spiritual is n't first , but that which is natural , then that which is spiritual . ||| Mere inon maka Uplerlawna Nal ulu mai ita de inona maka kwatiaga nohkerna . Nhorwua na'nama Enala inon mak ktawli'iru , de inon mak hota kdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
The first man is of the earth , made of dust . The second man is the Lord from heaven . ||| Adam mak kala ' ul die ra ' nan hadella tani . Mere Adam re'eni wornu de nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
As is the one made of dust , such are those who are also made of dust , and as is the heavenly , such are they also that are heavenly . ||| Riy mak kden la nohkeran di , Adam mak kala ' ulu de , nadurti-nawait nana re , pa hota inonni re emekwali Adam mormiorni la ' nohkeran di . Emkade wal lia riy honona mak kora Adam mak ktawli'iru mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha de rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida , de hota emekwali E ' pede rlernan inon mak kden rer lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
As we have borne the image of those made of dust , let 's also bear the image of the heavenly . ||| Pede emekwalima it inonni la dodo'ondi de yamkekni de emeknekama Adam mak kwatiawua nohkerna , de hota emkade wali pia it inon warwuarnu yamkekni emeknekama Adam mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Now I say this , brothers , that flesh and blood ca n't inherit God 's Kingdom , neither does the perishable inherit imperishable . ||| Pede ina-ama , a'ukot tiy miy die , inon mak kden la nohkeran di hota edon nler la Uplerlawna genni ralamni maka Enodi plolli la'pa emeka ray . Yoma it inonni di , mak hota kler la matmiati pa namkoha-namnanna , ta'en niana nler la gen miaka rmormiori pia nodi liarni .
Behold , I tell you a mystery . We will not all sleep , but we will all be changed , ||| Mere mitlina ! A'ukot nohora tiy miy la ' a hya ' maka ha yawunmua la ler ululu , mere la ' dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Nalharia . De hota it hononit di de edonna tmat miomuou . Mere hota it hononit de emeka ha nnio'luga .
in a moment , in the twinkling of an eye , at the last trumpet . For the trumpet will sound and the dead will be raised incorruptible , and we will be changed . ||| De la'pa itatlina noknoka mak ktawli'iru lirni de hota plinu-plinnianamde it emek ha nnio'luga . Yoma la'pa tatlin nana noknok de lirni , de riy mak kmati re hota ramori owa'ana rpa rlernan inon warwuar die rmor pia nodi liarni , ne it hononit mak kmormiori mia'ta , de emeka ha nnio'luga pa itlernan walia inon warwuaru pa emekwali ira .
For this perishable body must become imperishable , and this mortal must put on immortality . ||| Yoma it inonni mak kwatiawua nohkerna , mak hota kmat die pa namkoha-namnanna , de hota rala inona Ilyamou-Watyatoha mak edon kmati , pa ra rherun doinia la .
But when this perishable body will have become imperishable , and this mortal will have put on immortality , then what is written will happen , Death is swallowed up in victory . ||| La'pa la'aw ler de de , plola pa ntutu-nte ' olek la ' Puka lirni mak kakota kiwra , Rdi'na-rlo ' w oleka matmiati pa hota itler la mormiori pa nodi liarni !
Death , where is your sting ? Hades , where is your victory ? ||| Oi ! Matmiatia , emkameni la o rurmu-laimu ? ! Oi ! Matmiatia o li'irmu nhienni etla me ? !
The sting of death is sin , and the power of sin is the law . ||| Yoma emeknekama hodai ida li'irnu nhienni ed mak kodi matmiati , de emkade wal lia do ' a-hal de ed mak kod it la matmiati , me riora-liai agama ed mak kala ruri-lai lia do ' a-hala , yoma la ' a riora-liai die itat niohora plolli-halli .
But thanks be to God , who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Mere ita'uli-tawed reri Uplerlawna . Yoma Enwe'er doin olek it la it do'oni-halli re , ne hota it edon tmat pia nodi liarni , onnila ' a Yesus Kristus Itmatromlawanni hihi'ini la it rerieini .
Therefore , my beloved brothers , be steadfast , immovable , always abounding in the Lord 's work , because you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord . ||| La ' hade pede awuak pa ina-nara miy mak kden rer lia a ralmu , miruri-milai tioto ' memna la pesiaymi totpa yana riy rod miy lia klieratni . Mial ralammi tetema pa mkiar lia Orgahi-Orha ' a kniarni . Yana miapuhuna-miaprai . Yoma miatg oleka la hya ' maka mhi ' nan de la ' a mkiar lia Orgahi-Orha ' a kniarni , de hota hare honona re rodi unut lawna .
Now concerning the collection for the saints , as I commanded the assemblies of Galatia , you do likewise . ||| Ina-nara , dodo'ondi de twahaur nohor la ' a kupan mak itiwa tala la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu la ' a Yerusalem . A'ukot hari totpena mliernohora hya ' mak a'ukot oleka la krei mutnu mak kden la Galatia .
On the first day of every week , let each one of you save as he may prosper , that no collections are made when I come . ||| De nhi'inde la'pa krei lerni de mhioratreria pa rima-rima nala kupna mliernohora liawanni maka mliernan oleka la kniarmi ralamni de , pa mhi ' tar kupna re totpa mia mpiei a ' u totpena la'awa lerni amuai die yana twei pia rawok owa'ana .
When I arrive , I will send whoever you approve with letters to carry your gracious gift to Jerusalem . ||| Ne hota atie'el hande , de a ' g ed maka khopan pa riy maka mtiutg oleka re , pa rottiarga kupna rella Yerusalem . Hota agal ir horatni maka kakot nohora ir yala'ani pa ir nenenna rodia .
If it is appropriate for me to go also , they will go with me . ||| Ne la'pa a'umkek emkameni nanpena agor ir talla .
I will come to you when I have passed through Macedonia , for I am passing through Macedonia . ||| Ina-nara , a ralmu-rio'ru de hota aliola Makedonia , ne hade nhorwua nanpena amua tiomar tiy miy .
But with you it may be that I will stay with you , or even winter with you , that you may send me on my journey wherever I go . ||| Matialo'onamde agor miy pia twarin tiaru plein la wolla ida-woru onde agor miy la'pa tah ' i muti ngai nianpena a lia geni dom to ' a maka agiwra lia ' a , totpena hota mhima-mrie ' a ' u lia a yalo'lu-yala ' u .
For I do not wish to see you now in passing , but I hope to stay a while with you , if the Lord permits . ||| Mere la dodo'ondi de a ' g edonna mua tiomar ma'ta tiy miy , yoma a'uhmen gor miy pia lera ida-wor tio ' a , mere la'pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Nal talan mai a ' u de la'pa mak awuatiawu Makedonia de awuarin tiar pua nalo'on nan oke ' a .
But I will stay at Ephesus until Pentecost , ||| Mere dodo'ondi de agetla let Epsus ne hota adiella handi la'pa aliernana Pentakosta lerni .
for a great and effective door has opened to me , and there are many adversaries . ||| Yoma atiulla-kari pia nodi liarni la Uplerlawna kniarni mak Enala mai a ' u la ' handi . A knia'ru di riy rahu e rreiniana-ra'nana lol kalwiedni . Mere riy rahu mana e riwra rtot a lia yatyatni wali .
Now if Timothy comes , see that he is with you without fear , for he does the work of the Lord , as I also do . ||| La'pa Timotius ntiy miy die , de mpiatroma la kalwiedwedni totpena ralamni edonna worworga tiy miy , yoma e ' emekwali a ' pua nkar lia Orgahi-Orha ' a kniarni !
Therefore let no one despise him . But set him forward on his journey in peace , that he may come to me , for I expect him with the brothers . ||| Yan memmemna makden hande doma e rparwah ' a nan e ' a . Mhima-mrie ' a lol kalwiedwedni totpena plet pa enmai a ' die , yoma a ' g e wewiei enora makpesiay dom pali mak kiwra kmai handi .
Now concerning Apollos the brother , I strongly urged him to come to you with the brothers , but it was not at all his desire to come now , but he will come when he has an opportunity . ||| La ' a it amni-hyalli Apolsu , de awuagahniort olek e ' wa , totpena enor mutwualli rtiy pia rtomra-rnah ' a tiy miy . Mere ralamni worwor mua'ta pa ntiy miy die . Mere la'pa nlernan talla de hota enmai .
Watch ! Stand firm in the faith ! Be courageous ! Be strong ! ||| Riyorahniorat miyo ! Mtiorrer pitpitga miy pesiaymi de . Yan mimta'ata mere miruri-milai lia pesiaymi .
Let all that you do be done in love . ||| Hya ' ed maka ha mhi ' a de honona rlol kalwiedni .
Now I beg you , brothers-you know the house of Stephanas , that it is the first fruits of Achaia , and that they have set themselves to serve the saints- ||| Miy miat niohora Stefanus nora romni mniotni er mak kala ' ul pua kpesiay lia ' a Akhaya liewnu . Ir ralamni raplele'er la kniar di pa riwra rhima-rre ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-pepanni . Ina-nara , a'ukot tiy miy
that you also be in subjection to such , and to everyone who helps in the work and labors . ||| totpena mitlina-mitailla ira ror wut wualia riy korni mak kor rewre'wa ir pa ral ralamni tetema pa rhima-rre ' a Uplerlawna kniarni .
I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas , Fortunatus , and Achaicus , for that which was lacking on your part , they supplied . ||| La ' ler maka Stefanus , Fortunatus me Akhaikus rmai a ' u de a ralmu nahepru . Yoma tultulla-rere ' a maka miy edonna miala mai a ' u de irhi ' nana la miy nanmi wawannu .
For they refreshed my spirit and yours . Therefore acknowledge those who are like that . ||| Irhi ' nande a ralmu nahepur reri . Emekwalia ir rahepur wal lia miy . Riy mak emkare er mak tsu'ru-tselma .
The assemblies of Asia greet you . Aquila and Priscilla greet you warmly in the Lord , together with the assembly that is in their house . ||| Krei wokni-le'enu la Asia liewnu e rwak kalwieda tiy miy . Akwila nora Priskila ror walia makpesiay wokni mak kawok tar lia ir rom wamueheni mana e rwaka lir kalwieda tiy miy yoma miora walia Itmatromlawanni mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
All the brothers greet you . Greet one another with a holy kiss . ||| La'pa it inni-narni amni-hyalli makpesiay honona mai handi mana rwak kalwieda tiy miy . Hota miy idma nwak kalwieda la ida , idma nhar lirni la ida , mpiapahar lima , mpiare'et mat la ida totpena lol talan la riy makpesiay .
This greeting is by me , Paul , with my own hand . ||| A ' u Paulus wuak walia kalwieda-paitiota tiy miy , ne amueh ' a nek ed mak khorta kalwied di .
If any man does n't love the Lord Jesus Christ , let him be cursed . Come , Lord ! ||| Mak edonna kapal reria Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus , ndella pa hota rler la Uplerlawna niukamnu pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni . Awuak pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Nmai owa'ano !
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you . ||| Awuak de Itmatromni Yesus Nala ra'ani-pallu nanaloi-nanatar nan miy .
My love to all of you in Christ Jesus . Amen . ||| Hota a ralmu nden rer lia miy hononmi mak kora Kristus Yesus mlia ' olek ihru ida-ralm ida . A kalwied mamni tiy miy , Paulus
Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God , and Timothy our brother , to the assembly of God which is at Corinth , with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali makpesiay , makden la letlawna Korintus la'pa Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona makden la Akhaya liewnu . Paulus , maka Kristus Yesus Ntut niana pa agodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu onnila Uplerlawna ralma-rior wamueheni , a ' g inhatti . Agora it hyalli Timotius ma'enyatga horat di tiy miy .
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Ampak de Uplerlawna , it Amlawanni de Nora Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni nanaloi-nanatar nan miy .
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of mercies and God of all comfort , ||| Ya'uli-yawedi nden rer tiy O ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , de Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Amni mak Yesus wal pia Nkola tieru-nawur nehla de . Ina-nara , mai pia ta'uli-tawed E ' a . E ' de it Amlawanni mak ktut reria ralam kalwiedni mai ita . La ' a hya'-hya ' to ' a de Enala ralam yahepru me ruri-lai .
who comforts us in all our affliction , that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction , through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God . ||| E ' ed mak khi ' aruri ami la ' a hya ' a-hya ' maka khi ' akropna-krieutu la ' a a mormior miamni , totpena ruri-lai maka amlernan la Uplerlawna mana , amal walia ma maruri-malai riy maka kler la kropna-krieutu la hya ' to'owa .
For as the sufferings of Christ abound to us , even so our comfort also abounds through Christ . ||| Yoma kropna-krieutu la'pa nniahora-nniala ' a maka Yesus Kristus Nlernana , de am miana mlernan memn olek wal lia wa . Ne la'pa amler la lului-nurnuhru la ' a kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a de , hota Yesus Kristus de mana Naruri-nalai nan meman ami .
But if we are afflicted , it is for your comfort and salvation . If we are comforted , it is for your comfort , which produces in you the patient enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer . ||| Ne la'pa amlernana kropna-krieutu , de hade ed mak karuri-ka'orat nan miy , me nod miy totpena mlier la mormiori-lewlewna . Me la'pa amlernana ruri-lai , ha yala'ani de totpena miy miana mliernan walia ruri-lai mai ami pede hota miatu mitahan rer nieka kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a emeknekama mak amlernan walia re .
Our hope for you is steadfast , knowing that , since you are partakers of the sufferings , so you are also of the comfort . ||| Pede ampesiay mieman de hota miy miana miatu mitahan ralam mawalmi . Amparor emkade yoma amatga de emekwalima mlier olek la riwtu-hora emekto'ama amlernan olek walia de , de hota emkade wal pia la ' a Uplerlawna Nariei piede miy mana miruri-mi'orta emekwalima amlernan walia .
For we do n't desire to have you uninformed , brothers , concerning our affliction which happened to us in Asia , that we were weighed down exceedingly , beyond our power , so much that we despaired even of life . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , totpena miat niohor walia yakropna-yakrieutu mamni la Asia yapatni . Kropna-krieutu mak amlernan de ha werat rehi la ' a wawain mamni pa a ta'eni mtahan nana , pa nhi'nande amatniekame hota ammati .
Yes , we ourselves have had the sentence of death within ourselves , that we should not trust in ourselves , but in God who raises the dead , ||| Meman nek la a wniaror mamni de emolmolla rukum pen olek am pia . Mere la ' hade totpena yana ampar rer lia a ruri-lai wamueh mamni mere totpena amha'ar rer lia a aran mamni la Uplerlawna mak kodi plolli pa Namori riy mak kmati .
who delivered us out of so great a death , and does deliver , on whom we have set our hope that he will also still deliver us , ||| La hohoni de E ' ed mak kalewn olek am lia yatyatni-halalli mak kodia la matmiati-molmuolu ralamni . Me E ' ed mak amha'ara a aran mamni la , pa hota Enamori-nalewn owa'an am lia hare honona .
you also helping together on our behalf by your supplication , that , for the gift given to us by means of many , thanks may be given by many persons on your behalf . ||| Ne hota miy miana msiumbain rer lia ami . Mhi ' emkade hota riy rahu ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna onnila Uplerlawna Natlin la miy sniumbain rariahu miy re pa Entutga ralam kalwiedni pa Nhima-nre ' ami .
For our boasting is this , the testimony of our conscience that in holiness and sincerity of God , not in fleshly wisdom but in the grace of God , we behaved ourselves in the world , and more abundantly toward you . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , a ralam mamni nahepru yoma amparora de , a wniehwa-liakat mamni la it rimormior wialli de , amden rer lia plol wawna . Yoma amodia ihru ploi-ralma ple'era la ' a rira , emeka hya ' mak kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni . Ampehwa-mlakat de ami edonna mnairia rimormior kirkirni-ralma-riorni mere Uplerlawna tultulanni-rere'eni mai ami . Mere agat niohora de a wniehwa-liakat mamni la ' miy die nareh mieman la maka mhi ' a la riy korni .
For we write no other things to you than what you read or even acknowledge , and I hope you will acknowledge to the end- as also you acknowledged us in part-that we are your boasting , even as you also are ours , in the day of our Lord Jesus . ||| Mimkek nek la a horat mamni re tiy miy . Hare honona mak amkenia la horta pa mala tiy miy , de amal to ' a hya ' maka hota plet pa mpiaikia pa mnia'erit nana . Meman neka hota la dodo'ondi de miy edonna mnia'erit nan plollol ma't am lia hihi ' a-yapyap miamni . Mere awuak de totpena la ' ler maka hota kmai mnia'erit nan a plollol mamni . De a ralma-rio'ru totpa hota la'pa ntutu la lerni pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nmai pia Nodia watghudi lokarni , de miy ralammi nahepuepru la ' a reriei miamni , pa emekwalima la ' ler de a ralam mamni nahepuepur la miy rerieimi .
In this confidence , I was determined to come first to you , that you might have a second benefit , ||| Yoma la ' apuesiaya de hota miy ralammi nahepuepur nohora ami pede la ' ler delloo , a'ukot targa de amua tiomra-niah ' a tiy miy . Awuarora de hota a mua tiomra-niah ' ul miy nanpena alia ' gen dioma nanpena a'uwali owa'ana totpena mliernana himima-rere ' a re'eni woru la a maimia'yu .
and by you to pass into Macedonia , and again from Macedonia to come to you , and to be sent forward by you on my journey to Judea . ||| De agiwra liol pa atiomar tiy miy , la ' ler mak agiwra lia ' a Makedonia me nhor diewade aliol owa'an miy die . Ne hota la ' hade pa mtiulan wali a ' pua agodi lia'ru la Yudea .
When I therefore planned this , did I show fickleness ? Or the things that I plan , do I plan according to the flesh , that with me there should be the Yes , yes and the No , no ? ||| Meman neka la a wniaro'ru la ' ler de emkade , mere rwaldioinia de a ' g edon tiy tiomar tiy miy pia emeka ukot targ oleka . Pede yanpa hota mpiarora de a ' g e gherun doinia a wniaro'ru , de ha nnia'eratni de a wniaro'ru de edon namtemna yoma aliernohora rimormiori nohkeran di hi'ini , pede mikota a'ulahar miy .
But as God is faithful , our word toward you was not Yes and no . ||| Mere emeknekama hota hya ' ed mak Uplerlawna Nakot targa de hota Enhi ' nana , de emkade walia hya ' maka amakot targa tiy miy die , ami edon malahar miy .
For the Son of God , Jesus Christ , who was preached among you by us-by me , Silvanus , and Timothy-was not Yes and no , but in him is Yes . ||| Ina-nara , hota mpiesiay a li'ru ri yoma Uplerlawna A'nani , de Yesus Kristus , a ' g ed mak ukot nohora tiy miy , agor Silas me Timotius . Yesus Kristus de plol toto ' pa Enhi ' nana hya ' a-hya ' to'owa maka Enakot taru . Edon Nakota nhor diemade edon Nhi ' a .
For however many are the promises of God , in him is the Yes . Therefore also through him is the Amen , to the glory of God through us . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna nnio'oni honona re , hota plola pa Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana , onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni la it rerieini . La ' hade pede la ' Yesus Kristus de pede twet la plola amin yoma plola pa hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nakot targa hota Enhi ' nana . Ne la'pa itwayow nohora Yesus plolli de ed mak kodia ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna .
Now he who establishes us with you in Christ and anointed us is God , ||| Ne Uplerlawna ed mak kmeh ' a khi ' ami me la ' walia miy pia ittutrier tiertehra pa tora Yesus Kristus tla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . E ' wal pia ed mak kwalir nian it pa tler wut lia E ' a .
who also sealed us and gave us the down payment of the Spirit in our hearts . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Ntutga de E gahani ita yoma Enala Nhiwni pa Ndella it ihranu ralamni . Enala Nhiwni de totpa tat niohora hare honona maka Nakot targa hota Nal momuoga .
But I call God for a witness to my soul , that to spare you , I did n't come to Corinth . ||| Ina-nara , Uplerlawna ed maka ktutrier niohor saksi a ' u . E ' ed mak kat niohora a ih'ru-ralmu ha nakotkota . Plollol memna de la ler de a ' g edonna tiy Korintus de yoma la ' a a'uhmena ghi ' miy ralammi pa rmayo ' a la ' a a'uwenna tiy miy onnila miy do'omi-halmi .
We do n't control your faith , but are fellow workers with you for your joy . For you stand firm in faith . ||| A ' g e ukot emkadi ralul pia a ' g emolmolan nekama mak kodi plolli la miy pesiaymi . Mere agiwra tiutga a ino'nu emeka riy mak kiwra ktulan miy totpena ralammi nahepru la ' a miy pesiaymi de , yoma miy e mtiutrier tiertehra olek la miy pesiaymi .
But I determined this for myself , that I would not come to you again in sorrow . ||| La ' hade pede la ' ler delloo , ageti olek la a yala ' u de hota a ' g edonna mua liol owa'ana re'eni wornu la ' miy die . Yanhi'pa alia ' hande hota agodi owa'an miy lia lului-nurnuhru yoma la ' ler de miy e mhi ' reria do ' a-hala .
For if I make you grieve , then who will make me glad but he who is made to grieve by me ? ||| Yoma hota la'pa aghi ' miy pia milui-minuhru , de hota he ' owa'an pa mak kod a lia muki-hepru ? Enekneka miy maka aghi ' olek ralammi pa lului-nurnuhru re .
And I wrote this very thing to you , so that when I came , I would n't have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice , having confidence in you all that my joy would be shared by all of you . ||| Pede a ' g edon lia ' a mere rwaldioinia de a ' u'enyatg horta id tiy miy pa awuagahniorat miy lia hare honona . Totpa hota la'pa a mua tiomar owa'an tiy miy die , miy edon miod owa'an a lia lului-nurnuhru onnila miy wniehwami-liakatmi re . Yoma plollolli de miy er mak kod a lia ralma hepru . Ne apuesiaya de , la'pa a ralmu nahepur de hota miy hononmi wal pia mrie'ela yahepru .
For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears , not that you should be made to grieve , but that you might know the love that I have so abundantly for you . ||| Mere aghorta horat de tiy miy de a ralmu nmayo ' doin , ne uhedge'du la kniakru . A ' u'enyatu horat de a ' g edonna wuahaka totpena mlier la ralam mawla , mere aghi ' emkade totpena miy e miat niohora a ih'ru-ralmu di de enden rer tiy miy .
But if any has caused sorrow , he has caused sorrow not to me , but in part that I not press too heavily to you all . This punishment which was inflicted by the many is sufficient for such a one , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , agiwra ukot nohor owa'an la riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala de mak a'ukot nohor oleka tiy miy lia ' a horta ralamni . Agat niohora la riy harahu tiy miy die mtiutg hal olek e ' a pa miukmua . Hade ntut tiar lia hadewa . Riy de nodi a lia lui-nuhru yoma hihi'ini-yapyapni ululu de , mere miy die er maka riy de nodi miemna la lui-nuhru yoma hihi'ini-yapyapni ululu de . Onde enodia riy dom la tiy miy die la lui-nuhru . A'ukot emkade yoma a'uhmena u'itra-ulawan la e hihi'ini mak edon kaplola mak e nhi ' nan de .
so that , on the contrary , you should rather forgive him and comfort him , lest by any means such a one should be swallowed up with his excessive sorrow . ||| Mere miy e mhi ' a-myapi oleka mak kaplola pa miukmua oleka riy de , la ' hade pede la ' dodo'ondi meman pa awuak pa mhioratdoinia e do'oni-halli , me mial lir la pa her walia ralamni nmawla . Yanpa edon emkade hota ralam mawla narieiniande pesiayni nmadwuri .
Therefore I beg you to confirm your love toward him . ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara , awuak de mtiutg owa'ana ralam kalwiedmi la e ' a totpena nat niohora de , plola la miy msiayni e ' a .
For to this end I also wrote , that I might know the proof of you , whether you are obedient in all things . ||| Ne hade edon nmeh ' a mere ina-nara la ' ler delloo , agala horat mak ukot nohora hare honona de tiy miy die , de a ' g e giwra tia ' u wali miy , de hota miy mial toto ' ralammi pa mliernohora hya ' maka a'ukota tiy miy re me edonna ?
Now I also forgive whomever you forgive anything . For if indeed I have forgiven anything , I have forgiven that one for your sakes in the presence of Christ , ||| Ne miy e mliernohor oleka a li'ru pa miukmua riy de pede la dodo'ondi de , awuak pa mhioratdoinia riy mak khi ' do ' a-hal tiy miy die do'oni-halli . Ne hota la'pa miy e mhi ' emkade , de a ' muana ghoratdoin walia riy de do'oni-halli . Meman neka la e nhi ' do'oni-halli de mai a ' u de edon nwerta . Mere emkade ho'mana hota a ' muana ghoratdoinia e do'oni-halli la ' a Yesus Kristus gaini ralamni . Ne aghi ' emkade la ' a miy rerieimi .
that no advantage may be gained over us by Satan , for we are not ignorant of his schemes . ||| Aghi ' emkade totpena hegana amlawanni yana nnairia it ralamni mak kahmena nhoratdoin riy do'oni-halli pa nlernana talan pa npudi-nakla ita . It tat niohora oleka hegana amlawanni ralma-riorni mak emkade .
Now when I came to Troas for the Good News of Christ , and when a door was opened to me in the Lord , ||| La lera alia'awa la Troas , de totpena a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a Yesus Kristus , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nal oleka talan mai a ' pua akari lia hande .
I had no relief for my spirit , because I did n't find Titus my brother , but taking my leave of them , I went out into Macedonia . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana a ralmu edon namtemna , yoma a ' g edonna gora it hyalli Titus mpatrom la hande . La ' hade pede awuak tar lia makden hande pa alia'awa la Makedonia .
Now thanks be to God who always leads us in triumph in Christ , and reveals through us the sweet aroma of his knowledge in every place . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana a ' u'uli-uwedi Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu yoma a arwal miamni re ta'en niana rhi ' tertieri-tawtawa mai ami , onnila amor oleka E A'nani Yesus Kristus mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Ne Uplerlawna Nnairi ami mak ululu de mhi ' E arwalli pa mla ' makot nohora Yesus Makamori-Kalewan de la ' meni-meni to ' a !
For we are a sweet aroma of Christ to God in those who are saved and in those who perish , to the one a stench from death to death , to the other a sweet aroma from life to life . Who is sufficient for these things ? ||| Amakot nohora Yesus Kristus de , am die emeknekama mak ktutnia ayalin mak kahuwua mikmikir la Uplerlawna . La ' a riy maka klol talla mak kod lia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni , de lir mak amakota re de emekwalima ha mati , mak kahuwu-kawoin pa kwayotil rimormiori , mere la'pa la ' riy mak klol talla mak kod lia yamori-yalewna , de mak amakota re emolmolla huwu-woini mak mikmikri-lamliamnia la ' a mormiori-dardiari ralamni pede riy rreiniana . Nah , hota he ' ed mak ktaru ruri-lai pia nmeh ' nkar lia kniar dina ? !
For we are not as so many , peddling the word of God . But as of sincerity , but as of God , in the sight of God , we speak in Christ . ||| Riy rahu rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu pa rahak to ' kupna . Mere am die ematia ' emkade . A ralma-rior mamni de edonna nkoili-nkaili , mere amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de amdella ploloi-plele'era wawannu pa emeka mak kor oleka Yesus Kristus mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a ed mak kamkeka a ralam mamni . Amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni de emeka Uplerlawna ed mak khopna ami .
Are we beginning again to commend ourselves ? Or do we need , as do some , letters of commendation to you or from you ? ||| Ina-nara , a'ukot emkade , de hade emeknekama a orgah miamni e mtota a ya'ul miamni owa'ana ? ! Onde yanpa mpiarora de riy rakot nohora a yehwa mamni la horta ralamni pa na'enyat lia miy nanpena mrieinian ami , onde miy mtiota a ya'ul miamni la horta pa mi'enyat lia riy dom nanpena rreinian ami ? ! Meman neka la riy doma nhi'inde e rhi ' emkade mere ami edonna .
You are our letter , written in our hearts , known and read by all men , ||| Yoma miy die nekpa emolmolan nekama horta mak kakot nohora a plollol mamni . Miy emolmolan nekama horta mak rhorta la a ihru mamni ralamni , yoma miy e mdien rer lia a ralam mamni . Ne la'pa amla ' meni-meni to ' mana riy honona ratlin nohora miy pia rat niohora miy pesiaymi .
being revealed that you are a letter of Christ , served by us , written not with ink , but with the Spirit of the living God , not in tablets of stone , but in tablets that are hearts of flesh . ||| Miy mormiormi de , ntutga de Yesus Kristus Nkar lia miy ihrami ralamni , me ntut wualia de e Nnair ami pa am makot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu tiy miy . Emkade pede miy die emolmolan nekama horta mormiori mak Yesus Kristus orgahani ed mak khoratnana . Edon rhorat hade rnairia tinta . Mere rnairia Uplerlawna makden pa nodi liarni Nhiwni . Edon rhorat walia de rnairia watu-le ' u , mere rken tiar hadella rimormiori ihranu ralamni .
Such confidence we have through Christ toward God , ||| Amparan pia amakota miwra , Miy die emolmolan neka a horat mamni , yoma eneknek to'ama amora Yesus Kristus mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida me ampesiay tioto ' memna Uplerlawna .
not that we are sufficient of ourselves to account anything as from ourselves , but our sufficiency is from God , ||| Amakleha nhiapargen pia am makot nohora a rur miamni-lai miamni la ' a tulla-kniari ri , mere plollolli de Uplerlawna ed maka kala ruri-lai mai ami .
who also made us sufficient as servants of a new covenant , not of the letter but of the Spirit . For the letter kills , but the Spirit gives life . ||| E ' ed mak khi ' aruri-alai am pia mre'ela makot nohora Uplerlawna nnio ' a warwuarnu . Nnio ' warwuaru die ed mak kahnia'ar la Uplerlawna Nhiwni . Edonna emeka mak ha rhorta la deulu-tatra ralamni . Yoma deulu-tatra mak kahniorat de , riy mak edonna rlernohora de hota nodia la matmiati . Mere onnila nnio ' warwuaru mak itlernan la ' a Yesus Makamori-Kalewan de , pede Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak kala mormiori-dardiari mak kodi liarni mai ita .
But if the service of death , written engraved on stones , came with glory , so that the children of Israel could not look steadfastly on the face of Moses for the glory of his face , which was passing away , ||| Deulu-tatra maka ha rhorta-rle'ega la watu-le ' u , nodia mak edon katlin la matmiati . Emkade ho'mana la'pa Musa nakot nohora deulu-tatar de Uplerlawna hitni-reparni ndain la Musa herni-gaini . Hitita-reprepar de lomra-kaili pede ta'en niana riy Israel ramkek reria Musa gaini . La'pa liplipa-kamka'ma de ngai dioin la nhelelma , ho'mana ta'en niana ramkek reria Musa .
wo n't service of the Spirit be with much more glory ? ||| La'pa Uplerlawna Ntutga plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni mak karehi-kalawna la ' ler maka Enala deulu-tatar ululu die hota yaho'ma la ' a nnio ' a warwuaru mak Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nal de . Hota ha nareh liawlawan owa'an la plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni .
For if the service of condemnation has glory , the service of righteousness exceeds much more in glory . ||| La'pa deulu-tatra maka Musa Nala na netlia rimormiori do'oni-halli nodi plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni , yaho'ma la nnio ' a mak kariei piede rimormiori rora Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana onnila Yesus .
For most certainly that which has been made glorious has not been made glorious in this respect , by reason of the glory that surpasses . ||| Musa deullu-tatarni nodia plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni . Mere emeknekama la'pa lera nha'ata de it edon tamkek owa'an wa'du hitni-reparni , de emkade walia nnio ' a warwuaru onnila Yesus de plolli-mneheni nareh nian meman la Musa deullu-tatarni .
For if that which passes away was with glory , much more that which remains is in glory . ||| Musa deullu-tatarni rnairia pa edon nalo'ona mere nodia plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni . Pede hota emkameni la ' a nnio ' a onnila Yesus hihi'ini mak karuri-ka'orta pa nodi liarni ? Hota plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni nareh miemna !
Having therefore such a hope , we use great boldness of speech , ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara , yoma la ' a a nhia'ar aran gen miamni emkade , pede amparan pia ma makot nohora nnio ' warwuaru die .
and not as Moses , who put a veil on his face so that the children of Israel would n't look steadfastly on the end of that which was passing away . ||| Ami ematia ' Musa mak knairia koka pa na ntutwua gaini totpena riy Israel yana ramkek nana Orgahi-Orha ' a lipni-ka'mani la Musa gaini mak kgai dioin lolol la , la ' a ler maka Musa nakot nohora deulu-tatra la ira .
But their minds were hardened , for until this very day at the reading of the old covenant the same veil remains , because in Christ it passes away . ||| Iratlin nan Musa lirni mere riy Israel re ralma-riorni re ratniutwu . Ne la'pa dodo'ondi mana la'pa rpaikia puka deulu-tatra , mere ralma-riorni re honona ratniutuw ma'ta . Yoma emeknekama edonna ral doini ma'ta kok maka Musa na nahew herni-gaini pede edon rna'erit nan ma'ta . Hade emkade yoma eneknek to ' a itor olek Yesus Kristus tla ' ralm ida nanpena itna'erit nana Uplerlawna nnio'oni mai ita . Emkade de emeka kok mak ha ral doinia totpa ramkek memna .
But to this day , when Moses is read , a veil lies on their heart . ||| Pede la'pa ntutu-nte'ela dodo'ondi , la'pa irpaikia Puk maka Musa nhi ' nana , de emeknekama e rnair ma'ta koka tiutuw gai die , pede ralma-riorni re ratniutwu ,
But whenever someone turns to the Lord , the veil is taken away . ||| mere la'pa riy ida npesiaya la Orgahi-Orha ' a , de emeknekama koka tniutuw gai die ral doinia oleka wa .
Now the Lord is the Spirit , and where the Spirit of the Lord is , there is liberty . ||| Awuet la Orgahi-Orha ' a de hadi de nnia'eratni de Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhiw Lululli . Ne la'pa Uplerlawna Nhiwni Ndella riy ida ralamni , de do ' a-hala edon nodi plolli owa'an la e ' a me e ' edon nwali owa'an la ata-wa'ara la agama deullu-tatarni totpena nlernana yamori-yalewna .
But we all , with unveiled face seeing the glory of the Lord as in a mirror , are transformed into the same image from glory to glory , even as from the Lord , the Spirit . ||| Ne hota emeknekama ral doin kok maka ha ra rtutuw gaini de , makpesiay ralma-riorni edon ratniutwu owa'ana , mere tat niohor memna Orgahi-Orha ' a preheni-mkaini mak khitita-kreprepra . Pa hota Orgahi-Orha ' a plolli-mneheni de nayamkek la it inonni . Yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a , de Nhiw Lululli de ed maka Nkar lia it ihranu ralamni , pede ita wniehwani-liakatni de yeher to ' pa nlernohora E wniehwani-liakatni . Ne lera-ler nekpa Uplerlawna wniehwani-liakatni mak kalwiedwed meman de narehreh liol pa hota na'ititar rer lia nayamkek memna la ' it mormiorni ralamni .
Therefore , seeing we have this ministry , even as we obtained mercy , we do n't faint . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , amakot nohora nnio ' warwuaru la Yesus Kristus , yoma Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pa Nala kniar die mai ami . La ' hade pede ami edon mrei lia li'iru mere amru'rer tio'ola tulla-kniari .
But we have renounced the hidden things of shame , not walking in craftiness nor handling the word of God deceitfully , but by the manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man 's conscience in the sight of God . ||| La ' ler mulaliaini de ametlia de totpa hota ami edonna modi riy la hya ' mak edon kaplola . Yehwa mak edon kaplola de nhi'inde riy e rhi ' a la yawunwunamnu ne hota nodia ir la molmola-mama ' a . Mere ami edonna mhi ' emkade . La ' amkar die ami edonna mputra-mpalka Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Mere amhima-mre ' Uplerlawna de amala ralma ploi-ple'era ma mlernohora E ralma-riorni . La ' hade de totpa riy honona rat niohora de a kniar miamni di nden nek la plol wawna .
Even if our Good News is veiled , it is veiled in those who are dying , ||| Mere emkade ho'mana la'pa Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak amakot nohor de riy dom edonna rna'erit nan ma'ta , de hade emkade yoma riy re rahmena rpesiaya pa rna'aran reri olek talan mak kodi ir la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa hota rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni .
in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelieving , that the light of the Good News of the glory of Christ , who is the image of God , should not dawn on them . ||| Hegana amlawanni , mak kodi plolli la nohkeran di , ed mak ktutuw targa rimormior miak kakleh pesiay matni . Hade ed mak khi ' a oruli-augewat la mak edonna kpesiay re , totpena yana ramkek nana lelerni la Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de . Yoma Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de ed mak kakot nohora Yesus Kristus . Ne Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni , wniehwani-liakatni , mormiorni-lewlewanni la'pa hare honona etla Yesus wniehwani-liakatni .
For we do n't preach ourselves , but Christ Jesus as Lord , and ourselves as your servants for Jesus ' sake , ||| Yoma lir maka amakot nohora re de ami edon makot nohora ami pa emeka miy matrommi , mere ampahaur nohora Yesus Kristus de , de Itmatromlawanni Orgahi-Orha ' a inhatta , ne am die enekneka mak khi ' hopopna tiy miy onnila E ' a .
seeing it is God who said , Light will shine out of darkness , who has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ . ||| Amakot nohora Yesus yoma la ' ler ulul mueman de Uplerlawna Nhar lirni Niwra , Lelerni nhita-nrepar la melmelli ralamni ! Dodo'ondi mana Uplerlawna ed mak khi ' nan walia E lelerni de pa nrepar la ' it ihranu ralamni totpena it ralma-riorni lelera pa tat niohora Uplerlawna preheni-mkaini hititni-lomlomarni onnila itamkek memna hade la ' a Yesus Kristus de .
But we have this treasure in clay vessels , that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God and not from ourselves . ||| Mere a inon mamni , mak edon karur die , hota emolmolan nekama wra ' muaka ha ra ' nana la tan miak kakleh weli die , pa hota edon nalo'on wali ne npah ' a nana . Emkade ho'mana ami er mak kodia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak ktulliawna-kwelwierta , mak kakot nohora Yesus Kristus . Hade yala'ani emkade totpena riy rat niohor memna la ' a ruri-lai mak kareh mieman de , mak kod it la kniarni di , de plol toto ' a ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna limni ralamni , ne edonna nwatiawu ami .
We are pressed on every side , yet not crushed , perplexed , yet not to despair , ||| Hade nayamkek la ' a rnahora-rnala ' a am lia lol etnu-liolli ho'mana Uplerlawna edon Nolin am pia amla yawa . Kropna-krieutu nutin-ndahla am pia amaplin niohora de hota ami e mhi ' a hya ' a mere ami edon mparei lia a gen miamni mere amha'ar reri a aran mamni la Uplerlawna .
pursued , yet not forsaken , struck down , yet not destroyed , ||| Amler la kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a ho'mana , mere Uplerlawna edon Nolin limni-nwe'er rorni mai ami . Ne la ' lera dom de rwakloli-rwaklali am lia tan kierna wawannu , ho'mana ami ed ma'ta di !
always carrying in the body the putting to death of the Lord Jesus , that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body . ||| Yesus Nlernana nniahora-nniala ' a mak kod E lia matmiatni . Nhi'inde ami e mlernan walia nniahora-nniala ' a , yamuki-yama'ala maka trema kodi am lia matmiati totpena la ' emkade pede riy ramkek memna Yesus e Nmormior mia'ta , onnila ramkek nan E tultulanni mai ami .
For we who live are always delivered to death for Jesus ' sake , that the life also of Jesus may be revealed in our mortal flesh . ||| La ' a mormiori miamni de , de amler nek la yatlorni-yatra'ani maka trema-trema amler la matmiati , yoma Yesus Nhopan pa amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , totpena Yesus mormiorni mana nayamkek la a inon mamni mak hota kmat die .
So then death works in us , but life in you . ||| Hade nnia'eratni de lera-lera nekpa trema ammati totpena mliernana mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
But having the same spirit of faith , according to that which is written , I believed , and therefore I spoke . We also believe , and therefore we also speak , ||| Ne onnila amkenia matmiati la a gai miamni pede ami e mhi ' a emek Puka lirni , niwra , A ' g e gatga Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa hota Nalewn a ' u , la ' hade pede a'ultieri . A pesiay miamni de wuhurni-tekalli emekwalima lir de wali . Pede amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with Jesus , and will present us with you . ||| Yoma ampesiaya de Uplerlawna , mak kamori Itmatromlawanni Yesus la matmiatni ralamni , hota Namori owa'an wali ami yoma amor Yesus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida , ne na Nodia it rewre'wa pa tla tora E ' pa twatroma .
For all things are for your sakes , that the grace , being multiplied through the many , may cause the thanksgiving to abound to the glory of God . ||| Amler la kropna-krieutu honona re de , e rperkun tiy miy . Ne hota riy ra'ititar rer lia rmai pia rat niohora Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni . Ne hota la ' hade totpa rira liawanni mana rsumbain pa ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna . La ' hade pede ya'uli-yawedi nden rer lia Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
Therefore we do n't faint , but though our outward person is decaying , yet our inward person is renewed day by day . ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , ami edon mriei lia li'iru . Meman nek la a inon mamni mehrani-maunu na'ititar rer lia onnila kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a lawan rehia , nareiniande hota ammati . Mere emkade ho'mana la ' a ihru mamni-ralam mamni de yeher to ' pa naruri-na'orta me nodia ruri-lai warwuaru la ' lera-ler neka .
For our light affliction , which is for the moment , works for us more and more exceedingly an eternal weight of glory , ||| Yoma kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a mak amlernan de emolmolan neka malui-mahera oke ' to'ola ler ho'ke'eni di . Mere hota ha nodi am lia unut lawna pa nodi liarni . Unut lawan de nareh mieman walia malui-mahera mamni mak amlernan olek di .
while we do n't look at the things which are seen , but at the things which are not seen . For the things which are seen are temporal , but the things which are not seen are eternal . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , ami edonna mparor nohora hya ' mak kayamkek la ' nohkeran di , mere amparor nohora hya ' ed makdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha , mak edon kayamkek ma'ta . Mak kayamkeka re , hare emeknekama lawra-raini wniali re , mere mak edon kayamkeka re ha rden nek la pa nodi liarni .
For we know that if the earthly house of our tent is dissolved , we have a building from God , a house not made with hands , eternal , in the heavens . ||| Ina-nara , a'ukot emkade yoma amatga de , la'pa itmati , it inonni de hota emolmolan nekama hoiwiali ida maka rholi-rlet la pa hota edon nalo'on wali ne rweye'er doinia . Ne amatga hota Uplerlawna ed mak kala roma-lewu warwuaru mai ita . Hade de rimormiori edonna rkar niana , mere inon warwuaru maka Uplerlawna Nwahi ' taru la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha la'pa tsol lia hande pa nodi liarni .
For most certainly in this we groan , longing to be clothed with our habitation which is from heaven , ||| Mere la ' lera-mela ri , de kropna-krieutu nodi it pa it ralamni malui-mahera . It ralamni malui-mahera yoma it ralamni nod reria it inon warwuarnu mak hota tlernana la Ilyamou-Watyatoh de .
if indeed being clothed , we will not be found naked . ||| Itwak pa la'pa itmat die hota itlernana inon warwuaru . Yanpa itmat die itla ' nhiwa mak kakleha inona pa emeknekama riy ida mak kakleha lawra-raini pede ratliawihi .
For indeed we who are in this tent do groan , being burdened , not that we desire to be unclothed , but that we desire to be clothed , that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life . ||| La'pa itden ma'ta la nohkeran di , de itpolpuolu-tsawaun ita , yoma ita kwarni werta . Edon riwra itwahak pa tmati pa tolin doinia it inonni mak kwatiawua noh di wawannu , mere yoma itiwra totpena plet pa itlernana inon mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoh de , totpena it inonni mak hota kmat die , nhernu-nwauga la inon warwuaru mak kmormiori pa nodi liarni .
Now he who made us for this very thing is God , who also gave to us the down payment of the Spirit . ||| Mak kwahi ' a-kwayodia ita pa hota itlernan hade , de Uplerlawna orgahani Nmeh ' a , me Enala E Nhiwni totpena itat niohora la ' a hare honona maka Nakot targa mai ita hota itlernan momuoga .
Therefore we are always confident and know that while we are at home in the body , we are absent from the Lord , ||| Hade ed mak karuri-kalai nian ami pede ami edon mrei lia ' li'iru . Ami e matu walia de la'pa ammormior mia'ta la ' nohkeran di , de amora Orgahi-Orha ' a edon mhol riewre'wa ma'ta la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
for we walk by faith , not by sight . ||| Yoma la ' a mormior miamni la nohkeran di , de ami e mpesiay to ' a Yesus Kristus . Mere ami edonna mamkek nan ma't E ' a .
We are courageous , I say , and are willing rather to be absent from the body and to be at home with the Lord . ||| Pede amler la kropna-krieutu ho'mana a ihru mamni-ralam mamni edonna nwaler nan oke ' a . Mere a ralam mamni niwra maltaru nieka a inon mamni diwa , totpena amora Itmatromlawanni mden wutu .
Therefore also we make it our aim , whether at home or absent , to be well pleasing to him . ||| Hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , ampahak toto ' memna totpena la ' hare honona mak amhi ' a re hota rla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni , la'pa amden ma'ta la nohkeran di onde la'pa am mor E ' la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
For we must all be revealed before the judgment seat of Christ that each one may receive the things in the body according to what he has done , whether good or bad . ||| Yoma hota edonna nhal kuku ' et lia la'pa it hononita tawok tar lia Yesus Kristus mak ktorna watghudi lokarni gaini ralamni totpena hota rima-rima rlernana nhiolli-lietni wniahlani la mak nden ma'ta la nohkerna wawannu de . Nhioli-lieta yatyata onde samomuounu rlernan momuoga wniahlani honona .
Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord , we persuade men , but we are revealed to God , and I hope that we are revealed also in your consciences . ||| Ler maka rhudi-rpar ita hota e nrehgor wa , pede onnila amatu ma'unni-mamta'ata Orgahi-Orha ' a , ampak reria rira totpena rpesiay walia Yesus Kristus . Ne a hihi'-yapyap mamni honona re rdella plol wawna . Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a ed mak kat niohora a ihru mamni-ralam mamni , me agha'ara a ralmu tiy miy die miy miana miat wualia a ihru mamni-ralam mamni wali .
For we are not commending ourselves to you again , but speak as giving you occasion of boasting on our behalf , that you may have something to answer those who boast in appearance and not in heart . ||| La'pa a'ukot emkade , de a ' g edonna wuak pa mimi'uli-miwed owa'an ami . Enekneka agiwa ukot nohora a yehwa mamni mak samomuounu pa hota mhiapar rer lia , totpena hota miatu mpiahla riy mak raklak am pia yoma ramkek to'ola rira herni-gaini mere edonna ramkeka rira yehwani .
For if we are beside ourselves , it is for God . Or if we are of sober mind , it is for you . ||| Yanpa riy rwarora de a hihi ' a-yayap miamni la ' a Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni , de ntutga de ampi ' u-mga ' u olekwa . Mere plollolli de amhi ' emkade totpena a yehwa mamni de rla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni . Ne la'pa la ' riy yamkekni de ami e msamomuou , de a yehwa mamni de totpena nod miy pesiaymi la ga ' a .
For the love of Christ compels us , because we judge thus , that one died for all , therefore all died . ||| Amhi ' hare honona onnila Yesus Kristus sniayanni la it hononita . Yoma amatga de la'pa riy ida nmati , yoma la ' a riy honona rerieini , de hade emekwalima riy honona re e rmati olekwa .
He died for all , that those who live should no longer live to themselves , but to him who for their sakes died and rose again . ||| De Yesus Kristus Nmat die yoma riy honona rerieini , totpena la mormiorni ralamni de , rmormiori die yana rtot to ' a ira inon wamueheni , mere totpena riy rmormiori die hihi'ini-yapyapni re rla ' nana Yesus Kristus ihranu-ralamni . E ' ed mak kmati mere kmori owa'ana de yoma la ' a ir rerieini .
Therefore we know no one according to the flesh from now on . Even though we have known Christ according to the flesh , yet now we know him so no more . ||| La ' hade pede ami edonna mnairi rimormior wniarorni pa amparor nohora rimormiori mormiorni . Ululu amnair hade pede amparor nohora Yesus Kristus de mere dodo'ondi de edon olekwa .
Therefore if anyone is in Christ , he is a new creation . The old things have passed away . Behold , all things have become new . ||| Pede hota emkade walia de riy mak kor oleka Yesus Kristus kla ' ihru ida-ralm ida , de hota nwali olek la rimormiori warwuaru toto ' memn hade . Nhiolli-lietni ululu de nmolg olekwa . Hare honona de rwal lia warwuarnu .
But all things are of God , who reconciled us to himself through Jesus Christ , and gave to us the ministry of reconciliation , ||| Hare honona de Uplerlawna ed mak khi ' nana re . La ' a Yesus Kristus pede Uplerlawna Nhi ' it pa tor owa'ana E ' pa tkalwieda . Noma Nhopn am pia amla makot nohora la rira de hota ir wal pia rora Uplerlawna rkalwieda .
namely , that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself , not reckoning to them their trespasses , and having committed to us the word of reconciliation . ||| De hota la ' a Yesus Kristus hihi'ini pede Uplerlawna Nhi ' a rimormior it pa tor owa'ana E ' pa tkalwieda-tpaitiota . Uplerlawna Nhi ' hare de edon Nwarora do ' a-hal mak rimormior it tsi ' nan oleka la E ' e wa . Ne ami er mak mlernan oleka nhiopna la Uplerlawna totpena ami er mak kakot nohor walia de hota rimormiori ror Uplerlawna rkalwieda .
We are therefore ambassadors on behalf of Christ , as though God were entreating by us , we beg you on behalf of Christ , be reconciled to God . ||| La ' hade pede am di de Yesus Kristus hopopanni ami inhatti . Emeknekama Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka Naltier lia tiy miy lia a lir mamni . La ' a Yesus Kristus rerieini pede ampak lilili-mamuau tiy miy pia mrieiniana-mia'nana Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , totpa mior E ' pa mkialwieda-mpiaitiota .
For him who knew no sin he made to be sin on our behalf , so that in him we might become the righteousness of God . ||| Yesus Kristus Nakleh do ' a-hala , mere Uplerlawna Nal E ' pa Nakwara it do'oni-halli totpena it mana tor owa'an Uplerlawna tkalwieda-tpaitiota yoma la ' itor oleka Yesus Kristus ihru ida-ralm ida .
Working together , we entreat also that you do not receive the grace of God in vain . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yoma ami er mak kora Uplerlawna mkar wiutu pede ampak tiy miy totpena yan memmemna Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni mak Enal oleka tiy miy wia hota edon nwal nian la hadom la miy mormiormi ralamni .
For he says , At an acceptable time I listened to you . In a day of salvation I helped you . Behold , now is the acceptable time . Behold , now is the day of salvation . ||| Mere mpiahniorta la ' a hya ' maka ha rhorat targa la ' Puka ralamni , de Uplerlawna lirni Niwra , Awualir nian oleka ler ida pa A'utlin o sniumbainmu , totpa A'umori-ulewna o ' a . Pede oo ! Mpiahniorta la dodo'ondi ! Ler maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori , de lera inhat hadi wa !
We give no occasion of stumbling in anything , that our service may not be blamed , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , amahmen pa riy riwra la a tulla-kniar miamni mak amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , de ami edon mdella ploini-ple'erni . La ' hade pede la a kniar miamni ralamni de la ' a hya ' a-hya ' to'owa , de ampehwa-mlakta totpena yana a hihi ' mamni de nhi ' yawuhi-yawe'eta la riy ida pesiayni .
but in everything commending ourselves as servants of God , in great endurance , in afflictions , in hardships , in distresses , ||| La ' hare honona de amtutga mai am di de Uplerlawna hopopanni makdella plol wawna ami . De la ' Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni de amler la kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a , lului-nurnuhru ho'mana amatu mhur niohora ralam mamni mehrani .
in beatings , in imprisonments , in riots , in labors , in watchings , in fastings , ||| Amhur niohora ralam mamni la ' amler la yamuki-yama'ala , la'pa rtorna am pia rken am lia roma nhio'la ralamni . Lera dom de la'pa a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de rhi ' kokokna-rariarni . Amkar die maplin niohora lelerni hameni , melmelli hameni , lera dom de yanin edonna-yamat edonna , lera dom de ami edonna ma'ana-memnu hadomdoma .
in pureness , in knowledge , in perseverance , in kindness , in the Holy Spirit , in sincere love , ||| La ' a yehwa mamni de amtut muemna la am di de Uplerlawna limni-lakni ami . Yoma amakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni de amat niohor Uplerlawna ralma-riorni la'pa talanni . Amkar die mala ihru ploi-ralma ple'era mamni . Am miana mholi-mlet samomuou pa la'pa riy rhi ' yatyatni mai am die emkameni ho'mana , ami e mhu'ru-mhelma ira . Ne amha'ara wali aran mamni la Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli rurni-laini . La ' hya'-hya ' honona re ampehwa-mlakat kalwiedweda la a rimormiori wial miamni .
in the word of truth , in the power of God , by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left , ||| Hota riy ramkek nana de Uplerlawna lim ho'oni-lak ga'arni hopopanni am di yoma amakota ploi-ple'era Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni . Ne Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni nkar lia a ihru mamni totpena amakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni . La'pa amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la riy mak kiwra klernohora onde la ' mak kahmena kreinian am die , ne a yehwa-liakat mamni mak kalwiedwed de hota emek a keki-raut mamni pa ama mpadu'du-mpaleran pa ma mpatemna-mpahala a inon mamni yoma ta'en niana rwaghal am lia a yehwa-liakat mamni .
by glory and dishonor , by evil report and good report , as deceivers and yet true , ||| Amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni pa nodi liarni , la'pa riy rahe ' i-ramali ami onde rhu'ru-rhelm ami , la'pa rapupu-raheri ami onde ra'uli ami , la ' emkameni ho'mana amden to'ola plol wawna mere rto'on reri am lia mak ka'ohpa-kalahara .
as unknown and yet well known , as dying and behold-we live , as punished and not killed , ||| Amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni , la'pa riy riwra iraplin niohor ma't ami , mere plollolli de rat niohor memn ami . La'pa ratniekamde hota ammati mere ami e mormior mia'ta di ! La'pa ramuki-rama'ala ami ho'mana , a aran mamni etla genni .
as sorrowful yet always rejoicing , as poor yet making many rich , as having nothing and yet possessing all things . ||| Rhi ' ako ' a-her ami ho'mana amamuki-mahepur rer mia'ta . Ratniekame amakleha-maplara , mere amodi riy rahu pa rlernana Uplerlawan ra'ani-pallu , re'eni-tniarnu . Ratniekame riy mak kakleha yohya ' a ami , mere la ' a plollolli de a gah mamni haneknek wawannu !
Our mouth is open to you , Corinthians . Our heart is enlarged . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali makden la Korintus miy hononmi , ampe'er momuou hare honona tiy miy wia . Amakot nohora oleka tiy miy lia a ralma-rior mamni honona , me la ' a ralam kalwied mamni tiy miy .
You are not restricted by us , but you are restricted by your own affections . ||| Amtutg oleka a ralam kalwied mamni tiy miy , mere miy edon mtiutga ralam kalwiedmi de mai ami .
Now in return-I speak as to my children-you also open your hearts . ||| Pede ina-nara , dodo'ondi de mitlin nekpa a'ultier die emolmolla ina-ama ida naltier lia upni-a'na wamueheni . Ampak pa mtiutga ralam kalwiedmi de mai ami pa emeka amhi ' olek la tiy miy wia .
Do n't be unequally yoked with unbelievers , for what fellowship do righteousness and iniquity have ? Or what fellowship does light have with darkness ? ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yan memmemna mior wutga riy mak edon kpesiay Yesus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Mpiaror tek la ! Nhi'inde mak khi ' hihi'ini-yapyapni mak kalwiedweda rawok wut wual lia ' mak khi ' yatyata-halala ? ! Edon riwra lelerni nler teman la melmela toh ? !
What agreement does Christ have with Belial ? Or what portion does a believer have with an unbeliever ? ||| Riy edonna rlernan ma'ta Yesus Kristus Nora hegana amlawanni rla ' lir ida . Ne a'utian tek miy lia emkameni la makpesiay mutnu-rahanu yehwani . Ir yehwani rora riy mak edonna kler wut lia makpesiay re ramneneha me edonna ? Edonna toh !
What agreement does a temple of God have with idols ? For you are a temple of the living God . Even as God said , I will dwell in them and walk in them . I will be their God and they will be my people . ||| Hota rkenia gen miaka rru ' u-rtowar la uplera-upmati la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni ? Edonna toh ? ! Ne it di de emeknekama Uplerlawna mak kden pa nodi liarni romni kreini ita , yoma Endella it ihranu ralamni . Yoma emeknekama Uplerlawna orgahani lirni , Niwra , Hota A ' g ed mak kawniotra-kawniah ' a temna ira , me Agor ir pa mhol wiutu . Hota A ' g ed mak kla ' a Uplerlawan la ira . Ne A mu'tu-rah ' u irhatta .
Therefore ‘ Come out from among them , and be separate , ' says the Lord . ‘ Touch no unclean thing . I will receive you . ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni Niwra , La ' hade pede mhioitio'or la riy mak kaplinga Uplerlawan de , ne yana mriehgoru-mpiakriani . Yan memmemna mhieik la hya ' mak kakdeha-kaktiahli re , ne hota Arieiniana-ga'nan miy .
I will be to you a Father . You will be to me sons and daughters , ' says the Lord Almighty . ||| Hota A ' g ed mak khi ' Am tiy miy ne miy er mak kla ' upa-a'na la mai A ' u . Orgahi-Orha ' a , Makodi plolli la haneknek wawannu lirni hade !
Having therefore these promises , beloved , let 's cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit , perfecting holiness in the fear of God . ||| Uplerlawna nnio'oni re Enakot targ harella mai ita . La ' hade pede , ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden rer lia a ralmu , mai pia itto'or doin-ttahnei dioin do ' a-hala hya'-hya ' to'owa , de la'pa hya ' maka itsi ' a-tyapia onde hya ' maka itwaror nohora la ' it ralamni de , totpena tamou-tawitn olek la hya ' ed mak kodia kdeheni-ktiahlani mai it inon tetemni de . Ne itatu ta'unni-tamta'ata Uplerlawna . Hota la ' hade pede yeher to ' pa it nhiolli-lietni wniehwani-liakatni de nden reri lia plol wawna .
Open your hearts to us . We wronged no one . We corrupted no one . We took advantage of no one . ||| Ina-nara , ampak pa miy ihrami-ralammi rreiniana-ra'nana ami . Yoma amakleh do ' a-hal tiy miy , me la riy id tiy miy miana , ami edonna mtota la klieratni . Amaplinu mparora-mpalai miy re'emi-tniarmi kupanmi-kaimi . Meman nek la , la riy id tiy miy miana ami edon mhi ' emkade .
I say this not to condemn you , for I have said before that you are in our hearts to die together and live together . ||| A'ukot emkade ralul pia awuaghal miy . Mere emekwalima mak a'ukot oleka , de la'pa ammormiori mia'ta onde la'pa kniar di nod am lia matmiati ralamni , am di de amhoratreri miy .
Great is my boldness of speech toward you . Great is my boasting on your behalf . I am filled with comfort . I overflow with joy in all our affliction . ||| Apuesiay mieman miy . Ama'uli meman miy yoma wniehwami-liakatmi . Amlernan kropna-krieutu ho'mana a ralmu namtiertiernu yoma la miy wniehwami-liakatmi re . Miy nhiolmi re ed mak khi ' a pua a'uhepuepru .
For even when we had come into Macedonia , our flesh had no relief , but we were afflicted on every side . Fightings were outside . Fear was inside . ||| A'ukot emkade yoma la'pa amte'ela Makedonia ho'mana a ralam mamni edon namtiernu . Yoma la ' a hya ' to ' mana amlernana yatlorni-yatra'ani . Yoma amlernan yahuri-yawo'ora ne la a ralam wamueh mamni mana yamta'ata ndella yoma amparor nohor miy .
Nevertheless , he who comforts the lowly , God , comforted us by the coming of Titus , ||| Mere Uplerlawna , mak khi ' ahepru riy mak ralamni nmolu-nhelma , ed maka kal Titus nmai pia nhi ' ahepru a ralam mamni pede ami edonna mparora rupni-rupni .
and not by his coming only , but also by the comfort with which he was comforted in you while he told us of your longing , your mourning , and your zeal for me , so that I rejoiced still more . ||| Amahepur de edonna mhoratnana Titus nmeh ' a to ' a mere amahepur walia yoma enakot nohor la mai ami die , e ' mana ralamni nahepur nohor miy . Enakot nohora niwra miy ralammi e nmormior pia mior a ' pua twatroma-tahnei . Me nakot nohora miy mhioratnana do'omi-halmi la ' ululu pa ralammi rmawal doinia , ne la dodo'ondi de miy miana mial toto ' memna miy ralammi pa miod nian a ' u . Hade ed mak khi ' a yahepru pa na'ititar rer lia liawanni .
For though I grieved you with my letter , I do not regret it , though I did regret it . For I see that my letter made you grieve , though just for a while . ||| A hortu lirni mak u'enyatga tiy miy lia ler delloo , nhi ' amehra miy ralammi ho'mana , a ' g edonna gehel nohora horat de lirni . Plola la ' lera aghorta horat de , a ' muana gehel wali yoma agat muemna de hota miy ralammi nmayo ' a . Mere plollolli de hota miy mayo'omi la ' lera ho'ke'eni nmeh ' a .
I now rejoice , not that you were grieved , but that you were grieved to repentance . For you were grieved in a godly way , that you might suffer loss by us in nothing . ||| Emkade ho'mana la ' lera-mela ri , de a ralmu namtiertiernu olekwa . Mere a ralmu edon namtiertiernu yoma la ' a miy ralam mayo'omi la ' ler ululu die , mere yoma la ' a ralam mayo'omi de nod miy pia mhioitio'or doin do'omi-halmi . Yoma plollolli de miy ralam mayo'omi de nlol memna Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pede hade ed mak kariei piede amiwra ami edonna mhi ' arukia miy .
For godly sorrow produces repentance leading to salvation , which brings no regret . But the sorrow of the world produces death . ||| Yoma la ' a ralam mayo ' a mak klol memna Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , nodia nhiernu-wniau la ' a riy ihranu-ralamni totpena nhoitio'or doin do'oni-halli . Ne hihi ' a-yapyap die ed mak kodia riy la mormiori-lewlewna . Ne hota riy edonna rpili-rehela ralam mayo'oni de . Rwaldioinia de riy ralam mniolu-nhielma mak klernohora rimormiori ralma-riorni edon rodi riy pa rhopliala do'oni-halli pede hota rler la matmiati plalahwa .
For behold , this same thing , that you were grieved in a godly way , what earnest care it worked in you . Yes , what defense , indignation , fear , longing , zeal , and vindication ! In everything you demonstrated yourselves to be pure in the matter . ||| Ina-nara , mpiaror tek la ! Ralam mayo'omi de mak klol memna Uplerlawna ralma-riorni nod rer miy lia samomuounu . De ralam mayo'omi nareiniande mipe'el pa mhi ' owa'an makdella plol wawna me totpa mipe'el pa mimou-miwitn owa'an miy nanmi la ' a hya ' ed mak khi ' akdieh miy re ! Miwenan la mak khi ' do ' a-hal de ! Me mimta'ata de hota do ' a-hala de nodia niukmu ! Ralam mayo'omi de narieiniande miy ralammi nden rer lia a ' u totpena twatroma me totpa mipe'el pa mliernohora a li'ru-tu'nu . Ne hade edon nmeh ' a mere la'pa mpiaran pia miukmua riy mak khala wali ! La ' hare honona de mtiutga de miy edonna mhiala .
So although I wrote to you , I wrote not for his cause that did the wrong , nor for his cause that suffered the wrong , but that your earnest care for us might be revealed in you in the sight of God . ||| A hortu emkade tiy miy ho'mana , plollolli de a ' g edonna ghi ' to ' hadella ' riy mak khala , me edonan ghi ' walia la ' riy mak kaplola la ' do ' a-hala de . Mere plollolli de aghorta horat de la ' miy hononmi totpena miy orgahami miat niohora de msiayn memn ami . Ne Uplerlawna mana Nat niohor olek hade wali .
Therefore we have been comforted . In our comfort we rejoiced the more exceedingly for the joy of Titus , because his spirit has been refreshed by you all . ||| Miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi re nhi'nande a ralam mamni rahepur reri . Amahepur reri lia ' hade . Mere hade edonan nmeh ' a mere amamuki-mahepur meman nohor walia Titus yaheparnu onnila miy . Yoma miy hononmi mana mhi ' e ralamni pa namtierun wa .
For if in anything I have boasted to him on your behalf , I was not disappointed . But as we spoke all things to you in truth , so our glorying also which I made before Titus was found to be truth . ||| Yoma la ' ler maka e ' edon ntiy mia'ta de a ' u'uli oleka miy lia e gaini ralamni . Ne la'pa nte'ela tiy miy die , miy e mhi ' emeka a'ukot olek la e ' a , pede la ' emkade pede miy edon miod a lia molmola-mama ' a . Hya ' to ' mak amakot oleka tiy miy die ha raplola . Emkade walia hya ' maka amakot pa amran miy lia heyanna la ' a Titus gaini de miy e mhi ' oleka re , pede ha ntutga de a lir mamni mak amran miy die ha naplol wali .
His affection is more abundantly toward you , while he remembers all of your obedience , how with fear and trembling you received him . ||| La ' dodo'ondi de yeher to'ama e nsayn miy , yoma nhoratnan la ' a miy nhiu'ru-nhielammi la e wniatutnu-wniaye'eni , ne la ' walia emkamenila miy mrieiniana-mia'nana e ' a , de miatu mi'unni-mimta'ata .
I rejoice that in everything I am confident concerning you . ||| A ralmu nahepur memna yoma mlia ' riy mak apuesiaya la ' a hya ' a-hya ' to'owa .
Moreover , brothers , we make known to you the grace of God which has been given in the assemblies of Macedonia , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa upa-a'na hononmi , ampak tiy miy totpena miat niohora walia la emkameni la ' Uplerlawna Nal kalwiedni nkar lia ' a krei mutnu-pepanni mak kden la Makedonia re ihranu-ralamni .
how in a severe ordeal of affliction , the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded to the riches of their generosity . ||| De e rta ' g olek harella kropna-krieutu mak kwerwerta . Mere la ' a kropna-krieut mutliawna re ho'mana , de yeher to'ama rahepuepur reri me nhiolli re samoga pa rhi ' patuini-paro'on la ' makden Yudea , de edonna rhoratnana ir kleheni-larni .
For according to their power , I testify , yes and beyond their power , they gave of their own accord , ||| A ' g e gat niohora ira paro'onni de edon nodia kniunu-kniehen nohor kupna-kaini mere rala de narehi-nalawna . Ir edon rhoratnana ira kleheni-larni . Ir rala paro'on emkade de rlernohora ralma-rior wamueheni .
begging us with much entreaty to receive this grace and the fellowship in the service to the saints . ||| Irwakwak memna mai ami pia irre'ela rhima-rre ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak kden la Yudea .
This was not as we had expected , but first they gave their own selves to the Lord , and to us through the will of God . ||| Ira nhiolli-lietni la patuini-paro'onni de nareh mieman la mak ampakwaka . Yoma la ' patuini-paro'onni de rlernohor ulga Orgahi-Orha ' a ralma-riorni . Irlernohora E ' a pede rhi ' a-ryapi wialia hya ' maka amakota la ' ira .
So we urged Titus , that as he had made a beginning before , so he would also complete in you this grace . ||| La ' hade pede amakot nohor la Titus totpena e ' ed mak knalima-knalak nohora miy lia Korintus totpena mhi ' ahorga patuinmi-paro'onmi totpena mtiutga ralam kalwiedmi . Yoma la ' ler ululu de Titus ntulan nan miy pia mpiewlo'ona patuini-paro'onni de .
But as you abound in everything-in faith , utterance , knowledge , all earnestness , and in your love to us-see that you also abound in this grace . ||| Miy yehwami samomuou olek la haneknek wawannu , onnila la ' a pesiaymi mak karuri , miatu mpiatutu-mpiaye ' a , la'pa miy kirkira-ralma-riora samomuoumi hikmat pede mipepe'el la mliernohora Uplerlawna . La'pa miatu msiayni mai ami . Pede ampak tiy miy totpena emekwalima mhiol samomuou lia hare honona hota emkade walia mipepe'el pa mi'itar rer lia la nhioli mak kara ' a-kapalu la rimormiori wialmi .
I speak not by way of commandment , but as proving through the earnestness of others the sincerity also of your love . ||| A'ukot nohor hadi de a ' g edon ghopan miy . Mere ukot nohor to ' a makden Makedonia wniehwani-liakatni mak kala ralam tetema pa khima-kre ' a rimormior wialli , totpena a'umkek teka de hota mliernohor ira me edonna . Totpa hota agat niohor walia de plol toto ' a pa miatu mira ' a-mipalga miy rimormior wialmi me edonna .
For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , that though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , that you through his poverty might become rich . ||| Awuak pa mpiaro'on kupan de yoma miy e miat niohor walia de Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus e Nara ' a-napal wualia ita . Yoma E ' de ed mak kre ' a-ktar lia ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha , mere Nhi ' inonni de emekwalima rimormiori mak kakleha-kaplara , yoma Nhoratnan miy , totpena kleheni de nod miy lia Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu , re'eni-tniarnu .
I give advice in this , it is expedient for you who were the first to start a year ago , not only to do , but also to be willing . ||| Pede a'uno ' a-unatu emkadi tiy miy wia totpa miy e mhi ' a hya ' mak kaplola , de la ' anni itto'or la de miy er maka ma mpiewlo'ona ulga wniaro'on kupan de . Ne hade edon nmeh ' a mere miy er maka kwaror nan ulga paro'on de !
But now complete the doing also , that as there was the readiness to be willing , so there may be the completion also out of your ability . ||| Pede dodo'ondi de mipepe'el la kniarmi pa mhi ' ahorga totpena mliernohor neka nhiolmi de la ' mulaliaini . Mere la'pa mial kupna de mliernohora neka miy rurmi-laimi .
For if the readiness is there , it is acceptable according to what you have , not according to what you do n't have . ||| Yoma la'pa miy ralammi naplele'er nohora hya ' ed maka miala , de hota Uplerlawna Nreiniana de , yoma edonan Nwaka hya ' maka edon kden tiy miy .
For this is not that others may be eased and you distressed , but for equality . Your abundance at this present time supplies their lack , that their abundance also may become a supply for your lack , that there may be equality . ||| A ' g edonna ukot emkadi totpena atio'on rer miy pia mial memna nhi'nande hota mikleha . Mere a'umkek la dodo'ondi de mliernana pripanni-fa'anni , pede hade edon nhala de mitu'tu makden Yahudi kleheni-larni de lola miy patuinmi-paro'onmi . Emekwalima la'pa mimikleha ne irpehera , de hota ir er mak khima-kre ' miy . La'pa miy idma nara ' a-napalg ida totpena miy riewre'wa la walli-walli pa gahami etla .
As it is written , He who gathered much had nothing left over , and he who gathered little had no lack . ||| Hade emeknekama mak ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de niwra , Riy mak klernana liawanni , hota edonna narehi-nalawna , mere riy maka klernan oke ' a nmeh ' a de hota edonna nakleh memna .
But thanks be to God , who puts the same earnest care for you into the heart of Titus . ||| A ' u'uli-uwedi Uplerlawna , yoma E ' ed mak khi ' Titus pa ralamni napranran pa ntiy pia ntutu-nhan miy , pa emekwali a ralmu naplele'er pa atiulan tiy miy wiali .
For he indeed accepted our exhortation , but being himself very earnest , he went out to you of his own accord . ||| A'ukot emkade yoma Titus edon nhorat to'ola a wakwak mamni la e ' a pa ntiy , mere e ' nek de nodia ralma ple'era pa niwra ntutu-nhan miy . La ' e ralma-rior wamueheni enetlia de hota entiy miy lia hande !
We have sent together with him the brother whose praise in the Good News is known throughout all the assemblies . ||| Pa hota amal walia riy id pa nor e ' talla pa rtiy miy die . Riy de , de krei mutnu wokni-le'enu honona ra'ulia la yehwani-liakatni wniatutnu-wniaye'eni , yoma irat niohor olek walia enkar samomuou la nakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota .
Not only so , but he was also appointed by the assemblies to travel with us in this grace , which is served by us to the glory of the Lord himself , and to show our readiness . ||| Riy mak amakota di , krei-krei mutnu-pepanni rwalir nian oleka pa ror am tialan pa hota am rewre'wa pa amodi patuini-paro'ona maka rala la makakleha-kaplara la Yudea . Totpena hota la ' hade pede Orgahi-Orha ' a orgahani Enlernana ya'uli-yawedi la rimormiori . Me hota riy ramkek walia de ami e mala a ralam mamni tetema pa ma mtulan la it rimormior wialli .
We are avoiding this , that any man should blame us concerning this abundance which is administered by us . ||| Amhi ' hare honona de amparekan samomuoga . Yanpa riy rwaghal am lia nhiakra patuini-paro'ona mutliawna re .
Having regard for honorable things , not only in the sight of the Lord , but also in the sight of men . ||| Amiwra mhi ' hadom de lol toto ' memna rimormiori nora Itmatromlawanni ralma-riorni .
We have sent with them our brother whom we have many times proved earnest in many things , but now much more earnest , by reason of the great confidence which he has in you . ||| Ne hota amal walia riy id pa nor walia Titus nor talanwalli de , pa hota ir wotelu rtiy ulga miy die , pa rawoka miy kupna paro'onmi re . Riy de , amamkek olek la ' re'eni wo'ir memna de nape'ela pa nhima-nre ' a Uplerlawna kniarni . Ne la ' dodo'ondi de e ralamni naplele'er memna totpena nhima-nre ' miy . Yoma enpesiay miemna hota miy miala kupan paro'on de .
As for Titus , he is my partner and fellow worker for you . As for our brothers , they are the apostles of the assemblies , the glory of Christ . ||| La'pa rakot nohor la Titus , de a heiwia'lu inhatta hade , mak kor rewre'wa a ' pua amkar wiutu totpena amtulan tiy miy . Ne la ' a talanwali miamni rora mak kor e ' pa rtiy miy die , de ir er maka krei mutnu rhopan pa rla ' a , de la ' a krei-krei re nanni wawannu , me ir wal pia yehwani-liakatni rodia ya'uli-yawedi la Yesus Kristus .
Therefore show the proof of your love to them before the assemblies , and of our boasting on your behalf . ||| Pede amha'ara a ralam mamni tiy miy totpena mtiutga miy kalwiedmi la ira , totpena hota krei mutnu re rat niohora de lira mak amakota re la'pa amran miy lia ira , de ha raplol momuou .
It is indeed unnecessary for me to write to you concerning the service to the saints , for I know your readiness , of which I boast on your behalf to those of Macedonia , that Achaia has been prepared for the past year . Your zeal has stirred up very many of them . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , agatga de miy ralam kalwiedmi pa miala himima-rere ' a mak hota ra'enyatga la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu makden la Yudea re , pede plollolli de yana aghorta emkadi . Yoma agatga miy ralammi kalwiedni de pede a ' g e u'uli olek miy lia ' riy Makedonia . A'ukot la ira , giwra , La ' a anni itto'or la de , de it inni-narni amni-hyalli makden leta Korintus , la ' a Akhaya , de ralamni re raplele'er pa e rawokwok reri kupna maka riwra rala . Reiniande rira liawanni la ' Makedonia ralair niohora miy pia riwra rawok targ kupna wali .
But I have sent the brothers so that our boasting on your behalf may not be in vain in this respect , that , just as I said , you may be prepared , ||| Mere dodo'ondi de aghopan doini Titus pa nora talanwalli rora rtiy miy die pa rhedu-rtehra miy , totpena lir mak amakot oleka pa ma'uli miy re , de hota edon lol hgalli . Mere totpena miy e mhi ' ahorga patuini-paro'on de .
lest by any means , if anyone from Macedonia comes there with me and finds you unprepared , we to say nothing of you would be disappointed in this confident boasting . ||| Yanpa hota la ' ler li'iru de la'pa am tiy miy die , de riy Makedonia mak kor a ' tialla , la'pa irlernan miy edonna miwok ma'ta kupna , de hota emkameni la mai ami ee ? ! Yoma amakot la ir de , Makden Korintus re rape'ela pa rawok tar kupna ! Mere la'pa liol maka ha mpiettaru re edon rawok ma'ta , de hota miy miana yeher to ' pa mmiola-mmia ' wali toh ? !
I thought it necessary therefore to entreat the brothers that they would go before to you and arrange ahead of time the generous gift that you promised before , that the same might be ready as a matter of generosity , and not of greediness . ||| La hade pede agetlia de aghopan doin memna ir Titus rala ' ul a ' pua rtiy totpena rawoka-rale'ga liol maka ha mpiettaru re . Aghi ' hade totpena hota la'pa am tiy miy , de honona e rawokwok olekwa . La'pa emkade hota ramkeka de , hya ' maka ha miala re , de emeka ha nwatiawua ihrami-ralammi maka ploloi-plele'era . Yanpa rwarora de miala onnila amteku miy .
Remember this , he who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly . He who sows bountifully will also reap bountifully . ||| Mhioratreria ! La ' hadi de emolmolan nekama mak kawuli-katniamni . Yoma riy mak krinnia wini-hgona oke ' a la ' a nhyi'ini ralamni , de la'pa la'awa rieiki-wnio'ora de hota nlernan walia oke ' to ' wali , emeknekama hya ' maka e nawuli-natniamin nana re . Mere he ' maka krinnia wini-hgona yawuli-yatniamni liawanni la ' a nhyi'ini de , hota la'awa rieiki-wnio'ora de nlernan walia liawanni .
Let each man give according as he has determined in his heart , not grudgingly or under compulsion , for God loves a cheerful giver . ||| Mere he ' mak kiwra kal kupan de yana ralam nwerta onde yoma rtekua na'nama nala , mere hota enal de nlernohora hya ' ed maka enmemeh ' a enwaror nan oleka , yoma Uplerlawna ralamni Nala riy mak kala ihru ploi-ralma ple'era pa na nara ' a-napalu rimormior wialli .
And God is able to make all grace abound to you , that you , always having all sufficiency in everything , may abound to every good work . ||| Uplerlawna ed mak kodi plolli pa Nhuri-nwalia pripanni-fa'anni totpena mliernan rehenu-lawanni , me totpena ma mira ' a-mipal walia rimormiori wialmi .
As it is written , He has scattered abroad . He has given to the poor . His righteousness remains forever . ||| Hade emolmolan nekama maka rhorat targa la ' Puka ralamni la ' a mak kala himima-rere ' a la mak kakleha-kaplara , de niwra , Hota emeknekama ha rkarga wini-hgona , enara ' a-napalga mak kakleha-kaplara . Ne ralam kalwiedwedni de edonna nho ' a , mere nodi liarni .
Now may he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food , supply and multiply your seed for sowing , and increase the fruits of your righteousness , ||| Uplerlawna ed mak kala wini-hgona la ' a riy mak kanhyi ' a-katlunni , me ya'ana-yemnu mai it hononita . Enatnieman targa wini-hgona yawuli-yatniamni liawanni la ' a riy mak kanhyi ' a , pa la'pa la'awa rieiki-wnio'ora de hota nlernan walia liawanni . Emkade wali E ' ed mak khi ' ralam kalwiedmi pa yeher to ' a miod reri kalwieda-paitiota la rimormior wialmi .
you being enriched in everything for all generosity , which produces thanksgiving to God through us . ||| Yoma hota Enal miy pede mliernan hare honona totpena hota la hya'-hya ' to'owa de miruri-milai pia mira ' a-mipalga mutwualmi de , yana kukuhi-helelatmi . Ne hota miy limtutmi mak amodia la Yudea , de nhi'nande hota riy rahu ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna .
For this service of giving that you perform not only makes up for lack among the saints , but abounds also through much giving of thanks to God , ||| Yoma la ' a nhiolia kalwieda-paitiotmi de , de hota Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu la Yudea rlernana hya ' maka rakleha . Ne hade edon nmeh ' a , mere hota riy harahu ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna yoma la ' a miy kalwiedmi de .
seeing that through the proof given by this service , they glorify God for the obedience of your confession to the Good News of Christ and for the generosity of your contribution to them and to all , ||| Ne la ' a miy kalwiedmi de pede makpesiay liawanni hota ra'uli-rawed reria Uplerlawna yoma rlina-rmat nana miy tlinmi-tailmi la ' a Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kakot nohora Yesus Kristus , maka mliernohor olek de . Ne la ' walia ir mana ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna yoma la ' a ralma plele'er pa pletleta-pranranmi pa mdiurmu-mhiakra hya ' to ' makden tiy miy lia ira , me la'pa la ' riy dom to ' a .
while they themselves also , with supplication on your behalf , yearn for you by reason of the exceeding grace of God in you . ||| Ne hota la'pa irsumbain rer miy lia Uplerlawna ir ralamni de rden rer lia tiy miy , yoma la ' a E ralma kalwiedni mak kareh mieman de , mak kar lia miy ihrami ralamni .
Now thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift ! ||| Mere ina-nara ama-hyali , mai pia ta'uli-tawedia Uplerlawna yoma Enal olek walia mai ita hya ' maka ita taken niana tpar nana tulliawanni-welwieratni !
Now I Paul , myself , entreat you by the humility and gentleness of Christ , I who in your presence am lowly among you , but being absent am bold toward you . ||| Ina-nara , la ' miy mutwualmi re de nhi'inde riwra , Paulus de , la'pa nor it pa tor rewre'wa la gen ida , de enaltier die emeknekama namta'ata . Mere la'awa olieta nampena nodi paranni pa nhopn ita . Mere a nhio'lu edon emkade yoma umta'ata . Mere ina-nara ama-hyali , a ' u Paulus de a ' g e ghu'ru-ghelma , me aniairia lira mnapnapla pa emeka Yesus Kristus yehwani pa awuak hadi tiy miy .
Yes , I beg you that I may not , when present , show courage with the confidence with which I intend to be bold against some , who consider us to be walking according to the flesh . ||| La'pa atiy miy die awuak de yana mhi ' a ralmu pa nleretniekla namehra pa awuenan tiy miy . Yoma a ' g e wuaror nana hota atiy die , a ' g edonna ghur niohor riy dom tiy miy mak kiwra amkar die amlernohor to ' a rimormiori nohkerna ralma-rior wamueheni .
For though we walk in the flesh , we do n't wage war according to the flesh , ||| Am di de , plola pa am die rimormior ami , mere ami edon mnairia rimormiori nohkerna yala'ani pa matowar nan riy mak kmalawan la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak kaplola .
for the weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh , but mighty before God to the throwing down of strongholds , ||| Keki-rautu maka amnairia la a wniadu'du-wnialeran mamni di , de edonna ma ' nana harella nohkeran di wawannu , mere Uplerlawna mak kodi plolli la nohkerna-lyanit maran di ed mak kala hare la ami . Yoma plolli-mneheni maka Ha Nala mai am die , de hota amala ma mawiru-mawewla mak kmalawna Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , pa emeka keki-rautu maka rnairia pa ra rwakoha-rwananna geni-tien mak karur miemna .
throwing down imaginations and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God and bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ , ||| Amnairia E plolli-mneheni emekneka makodi keki-rautu rweyata-rwaniawua lutur watu-werna tuini maka kle'lu reria arwalli letni me rtorna arwalli , de amala Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni ma matowra riy kospo'ona mak ktota riy la klieratni pa hota edon rat niohor Uplerlawna . Amatowra ir ralma-riorni mak edon kaplola , me amhi ' a re pa rru ' rieri-rtowar rer lia Yesus Kristus .
and being in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience is made full . ||| Ne amhi ' wali miy pia mhiu'ru-mhielm owa'an la Yesus Kristus , nhor diewade ami er mak ketlia riy mak kakleh ma'ta ya'unni-yamta'ata re do'oni-halli pa rlernana niukmu .
Do you look at things only as they appear in front of your face ? If anyone trusts in himself that he is Christ 's , let him consider this again with himself , that even as he is Christ 's , so we also are Christ 's . ||| Ina-nara , mpiaror samomuou la ' a hya ' ed mak kaplola , maka plollolli de miat niohor oleka de . La'pa riy ida ntutga inonni de niwra Yesus Kristus limni-rorni olek e wa , hota e ' mana nhorat nan walia ami , Yesus Kristus limni-rorni wali ami , pa emekwali e ' a .
For even if I boast somewhat abundantly concerning our authority , which the Lord gave for building you up and not for casting you down , I will not be ashamed , ||| Pa la'pa ukot harahu rehi la Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni maka Enal mai ami ho'mana , a ' g edonna muola-mua ' a la ' hade . Yoma Enala hade pa ma mhedu-mtehra miy lia kalwiedwedni , me edon riwra Nal hade pa ma mpeye'er miy pesiaymi .
that I may not seem as if I desire to terrify you by my letters . ||| A'ukot emkade yoma uhmen memna miwra agala a hortu ga umta'ata miy lia hande .
For , His letters , they say , are weighty and strong , but his bodily presence is weak , and his speech is despised . ||| Yanpa hota mimpiesiay riy mak kiwra , Paulus horatni re lirni maklekla emeka enodi plolli , mere la'pa nden wut lia mai ami , de yamkekni emeka mak edon karuri me naplinu-naplo'ola wniahauru .
Let such a person consider this , that what we are in word by letters when we are absent , such are we also in deed when we are present . ||| La'pa riy mak kakot emkare , hota mpiaror samomuou walia a yehwa mamni la'pa amtiy miy die ! Yoma hota a yehwa mamni la ' miy de maklekal walia , pa emekwalima a horat mamni tiy miy !
For we are not bold to number or compare ourselves with some of those who commend themselves . But they themselves , measuring themselves by themselves , and comparing themselves with themselves , are without understanding . ||| Ami edon makot nohora a kniar mamni di pa emeka amal wutga a inon mamni nor wutga mak khi ' inonni pa katulu re ramneneha . Yoma ir rmeh ' a nekpa rta ' u-rta ' g o'tani la riy maka hihi'ini-yapyapni ror wutga ir hihi'ini-yapyapni ramneneha . Ir rhi ' emkade de podaknu re , yoma rwarora de riy rora ir pa ramneha nanpena rla ' riy orkotkota-ornanana emekwali ira !
But we will not boast beyond proper limits , but within the boundaries with which God appointed to us , which reach even to you . ||| Mere am di de edonna mhi ' targa nhioli-liet mak emkare . Yoma la'pa a orgah miamni makot nohora kniar miaka Uplerlawna Nala la ' am die , de ami edonna mpo'on-mpei niohora riy doma kwarni kniarni . Mere amakot nohor to ' a Uplerlawna kniarni maka Nala mai ami . Ne hota miy miana , Uplerlawna Nal pa ampatutu-mpaye ' a miy lia a kniar miamni die .
For we do n't stretch ourselves too much , as though we did n't reach to you . For we came even as far as to you with the Good News of Christ , ||| Pede la'pa amakot nohora a maimiai miamni tiy miy onnila Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kakot nohora Yesus Kristus de rerieini , a lir mamni de edon nhala . Yoma plollolli de ami er mak kala ' ul tiy miy pa amakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni de .
not boasting beyond proper limits in other men 's labors , but having hope that as your faith grows , we will be abundantly enlarged by you in our sphere of influence , ||| Ne am miana edonna mtota ya'ul miamni la ' a tulla-kniari mak riy dom to ' a rhi ' nana la ' geni-tien wamueheni . Mere amha'ara a aran mamni la , hota miy pesiaymi de mlier to'ola ga ' a totpena hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' a a kniar miamni la tiy miy die nawerna-naplahwa .
so as to preach the Good News even to the parts beyond you , not to boast in what someone else has already done . ||| Totpa hota la ' hade pa amla makotkot lol owa'an Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de la ' a leta-ruhuna dom to ' a maka riy dom edon rkar mia'ta la . Yoma mahmena mhi ' inon mamni pa natulu-napetna la ' a tulla-kniar miaka riy dom to ' a rhi ' nan oleka la geni-tien wamueheni re .
But he who boasts , let him boast in the Lord . ||| Pa hota emekneka maka rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de niwra , Yana mpio'on atulga inon wamuehemi . Mere mikot nohora hya ' maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhi ' nana totpa riy ra'uli-rawed E ' a .
For it is n't he who commends himself who is approved , but whom the Lord commends . ||| Yoma riy mak ka'ulia inon wamueheni , de hota edonna rden la plol wawna la Uplerlawna yamkekni , mere enekneka riy maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nmeh ' a Na'ul nian to ' a .
I wish that you would bear with me in a little foolishness , but indeed you do bear with me . ||| Ina-nara , dodo'ondi de aliernohora riy mak kpo'on apenu-alawna inonni totpena agiwra u'uli-uwedi a knia'ru la ' a Uplerlawna kniarni . Mere agat niohora de itpo'on atulga it inonni de hihi ' a-yapyapi podpodku-padpadku hade . Mere mhiur niohor owa'an a li'ru ri emeka miy e mhiur niohor oleka hya ' maka ukot oleka de .
For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy . For I promised you in marriage to one husband , that I might present you as a pure virgin to Christ . ||| Ina-nara , a'utiak reri miy emekwalima Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a nek de Natiak reri miy . Yoma a'uhmen memna mhioitio'or doin la Yesus lirni-tunnu pa mliernohora hya ' mak edon kaplola . Emkade pede a ' die de emolmolla ama ida me miy die emolmolla a a'nu pat hararara ida mak kaplinu mua'ta nohkerna yala'ani pa a'utiak reria . Noma agolin li'mu la a'na muanke ' a id pa hota nora rmehlima . Ne hota muanke ' de ntot nohora Yesus Kristus inhatta .
But I am afraid that somehow , as the serpent deceived Eve in his craftiness , so your minds might be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ . ||| Mere a ralmu wolwo'la la ' ralma-riormi , yanhi'pa ralma-riormi naheri-nawalia pa mhioitio'or doini-mtiahnei dioinia Yesus Kristus , pa hota emekwalima la ' ululu la Hawa ' a , de niy npudi-nakal nana . La'pa emkade de hota miy edonna mial owa'an ralma ploi-ple'er pa mliernohor toto ' Yesus Kristus .
For if he who comes preaches another Jesus whom we did n't preach , or if you receive a different spirit which you did n't receive , or a different good news which you did n't accept , you put up with that well enough . ||| A'ukot emkade yoma la ' yamkekni de emolmolan nekama miy e mliernohor rer tio ' a riy mak kmai pia kakot nohora Yesus dom to ' a , mere Yesus mak amakot nohora tiy miy die ematia ' hade . Miy edon mpiayotlia riy mak kakot nohora nhiwa nora kot kalwieda-paitiot mak edon nora Uplerlawna Nhiwni nora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak amakot nohor oleka tiy miy de ramneneha .
For I reckon that I am not at all behind the very best apostles . ||| Mere la ' a wniaro'ru de maka rhoiya la makodi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka orkotkotni-ornananni re edon nareh nian a ' u .
But though I am unskilled in speech , yet I am not unskilled in knowledge . No , in every way we have been revealed to you in all things . ||| Matialo'onama a ' g e uplinu ultier mia'ta , mere la'pa ralma-riora la ' a Yesus lirni-tunnu de , de e npenpuenu tetem la a ih'ru-ralmu . La hade , de amtutg olek la miy wia la ' a hare honona maka amakot nohora me amhi ' nana .
Or did I commit a sin in humbling myself that you might be exalted , because I preached to you God 's Good News free of charge ? ||| Meman neka la lera a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda mak kwatiawua Uplerlawan de tiy miy , de a ' g edonna ghopan pa mimsiewa-mkiai a ' u . Mere aghi ' a ino'nu pa emek miy hopopanmi-lili'irmi totpa aghima-rie ' miy . Yoma akar pia agala utu'tu a ya'anu-yemnu hewewtu-naniairnu totpa hota ukot nohora Uplerlawna lirni tiy miy . La'pa aghi ' hade de a ' g e ghal tiy miy ? !
I robbed other assemblies , taking wages from them that I might serve you . ||| La ' lera awuatutu miy , de krei wokni-le'enu dom to ' er mak kal patuini-paro'onni mai a ' u . Hade emkade de emolmolan nekama a ' g e tiot arukia krei-krei re totpena aghima-rie ' miy .
When I was present with you and was in need , I was n't a burden on anyone , for the brothers , when they came from Macedonia , supplied the measure of my need . In everything I kept myself from being burdensome to you , and I will continue to do so . ||| La ' ler mak adien wut lia miy la'pa aliernana kleha-lara ho'mana a ' g edonna wuaka limtut id tiy miy pia aghi ' awerta miy . Yoma hya ' mak a'uhaka , de itpesiay wialli la ' a Makedonia rawok momuoga pa rodia mai a ' u . A'utiak kalwiedwed hare honona , totpena yana atiot aruki miy , me a'uhmen atiot aruki miy pia nodi liarni .
As the truth of Christ is in me , no one will stop me from this boasting in the regions of Achaia . ||| Ina-nara , emeknekama Yesus Kristus lirni honona raplollola , me E ' ed mak kden rer lia a ih'ru-ralmu de , a li'ru di de naplol memna , de hota a ' g edonna wuak memna kupna tiy makden Korintus miy , la'pa riy dom to ' a makden la Akhaya liewnu . Yanpa hota la ' hade pede ta'en nian a'ukot nohor owa'ana giwra a ' g edon wuak kupan tiy miy .
Why ? Because I do n't love you ? God knows . ||| Hya ' a nrei piede a ' g edon wuak kupan tiy miy ? Yanpa mpiarora yoma a ' g edonna siayni miy ? ! Plol toto ' a Uplerlawna Nat niohora de a ' g e gatu siayn miy .
But what I do , that I will continue to do , that I may cut off opportunity from those who desire an opportunity , that in which they boast , they may be recognized just like us . ||| Mere a ' g edon wuaka kupan tiy miy me hota emkade pa nodi liarni , totpena maka ha rhoiya la makodia Yesus Kristus lirni-tunnu , rakleha nhiapargen pia rpo'ona apenu-alawna inonni me riwra irkari emekwalima ami , yoma nhi'inde rwahak pa miy miala ir siewni-kaini .
For such men are false apostles , deceitful workers , masquerading as Christ 's apostles . ||| Yoma riy mak emkare , riwra irmeh ' a er maka Yesus Kristus Nhopna pa rodi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , totpena riy rpesiay ira , mere edon naplola . Irkar lia Uplerlawna kniarni , de edon rlol talla mere ra'ohpa-ralahar to ' a .
And no wonder , for even Satan masquerades as an angel of light . ||| Tamkek irhi ' emkade , de yana twer reri it wawni yoma hegana amlawanni nek de nawiru-nawalia inonni pa emeknekama Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu maka khita-krepra ida .
It is no great thing therefore if his servants also masquerade as servants of righteousness , whose end will be according to their works . ||| La ' hade pede yana mpier rer wiapmi la ' a hegana limni-rorni mak ktot pa rakot nohora Uplerlawna yala'ani pa emeka riy makdella plol wawna . Mere hota la'awa hohoni nanpena irlernana mdududga hihi'ini-yapyapni re wniahlani !
I say again , let no one think me foolish . But if so , yet receive me as foolish , that I also may boast a little . ||| Ina-nara , awuak owa'an de yana riy dom tiy miy die e rhoi a lia riy podku yoma a li'ru mak emkadi . Mere la'pa plola pa la miy wniarormi , de riy podku a ' u , de hota emkameni la mitlin la riy dom to ' mak kran inonni emeknekama riy podku nhi'inde rhi ' a , mhiur dioin wali a ' pua awuahaur nohora a hihi ' a-yapya'pu oke ' tiy miy .
That which I speak , I do n't speak according to the Lord , but as in foolishness , in this confidence of boasting . ||| La ' hadi de hota awuet la hya'-hya ' ed maka aghi ' nan oleka wa , mere Orgahi-Orha ' a edon Nhopan pa a'ukot hadi . Meman neka la ' hadi de a ' g e ukot nohor la plollol genni , mere ultier die emeknekama mak podku nhi'inde rhi ' a .
Seeing that many boast after the flesh , I will also boast . ||| Yoma la riy rahu tiy miy die e rakot nohora ir hihi'ini-yapyapni de rlernohora nohkeran di yala'ani , pede a ' muana giwra ukot nohor walia a li'ru-tu'nu .
For you bear with the foolish gladly , being wise . ||| Hota ukot nohora a li'ru-tu'nu re yoma la miy wniarormi de miy er mak ktaru kirkira-ralma-riora samomuou pede miod niohora rira lirni-tunnu , kennama riy podku lirni-tunnu hare .
For you bear with a man if he brings you into bondage , if he devours you , if he takes you captive , if he exalts himself , or if he strikes you on the face . ||| Ne hade edon nmeh ' a mere miolin doin nek ir pa rodi plolli tiy miy , onde ra'ana miy liwatmi-odapmi onde ratulu-rapetan nande rwatei-rwahapar miy .
To my shame , I speak as though we had been weak . Yet in whatever way anyone is bold I speak in foolishness , I am bold also . ||| Ne emolmolan nekama mpiarora de plollolli de hota amuola-mua ' a yoma a ' g edon puaran pia a ' g e ghi ' yohya ' mak emkare . Mere la ' a hya ' maka riy dom to ' a rparan pia rwareheya , de a ' muana awuareh wialia . Mere la'pa awuareh wialia de awuarora de a ' g e ghi ' emolmolla mak podku rhi ' a .
Are they Hebrews ? So am I . Are they Israelites ? So am I . Are they the offspring of Abraham ? So am I . ||| Iriwra ir de makden la Ibrani ira ? ! A ' niek de Ibrani id a ' u . Onde makden Israel mak Uplerlawna Nwalir niana harena ? ! A ' niek de emkade wali . Yanpa Abraham duratni ira ? ! A ' niek de Abraham duratni wali a ' u .
Are they servants of Christ ? I speak as one beside himself . I am more so , in labors more abundantly , in prisons more abundantly , in stripes above measure , and in deaths often . ||| Mak kre'ela ktulla-kar lia Yesus Kristus kniarni ira ? Inee ! Hota awuahaur emkadi de emeknekama a'uplinu-uplo ' a . Mere plola , la a ' di de riy mak ktulla-kar pia kareh momuou lia ' hare honona . Atiulla-kar die a ' g edonna umkek lera pa arien a ' u . Ne alier la kropna-krieutu lui-nuhru pa a'ureh wial lia ir wali . Yoma re'eni wo'ir memna riy rod a lia roma nhio'la onde ramuki-rama'al a ' u la'pa alier la nniahora-nniala ' a . Nhi'inde alier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani mak emkari , de trema-trema amuati .
Five times I received forty stripes minus one from the Jews . ||| La re'eni wolima de riy Yahudi rtorn a ' pua rala ha ulti ra rliwar nan a lia re'eni terampwotelu wehrani wosiewa .
Three times I was beaten with rods . Once I was stoned . Three times I suffered shipwreck . I have been a night and a day in the deep . ||| Makden Roma rala ora-au ra rliwar nan a lia re'eni wotelu . Ralamni de riy ral walia watu ra rwatopri a ' u yoma riwra rwatliewur wen a ' u . Re'eni wotel lia lol lora de kapli-kapli maka agodia re rpah ' a nana , me ralamni de aliolioi-pialpial lol lora nan lera ida-mel ida .
I have been in travels often , perils of rivers , perils of robbers , perils from my countrymen , perils from the Gentiles , perils in the city , perils in the wilderness , perils in the sea , perils among false brothers , ||| A ' g edon rien a lia a yalo'lu-yala ' u mere alia ' a-muai tio'owa . Ne la ' a yala ' u de aliernana riwtu-hora liawanni , emkameni la gerlawna , la riy mak kwarui-kwate'la la talla ralamni , la makden Yahudi rhi ' gahani , emkameni walia riy Yahudi atia ' a , la ' walia mak kden la letlawna mak khi ' kokokna-rariarni . Alier la riwtu-hora la wo'ora-kawru letgarni , la ' lora , ne la ' walia riy mak ktot pa riwra ir de makpesiay ira , mere rhi ' neka yatyatni-halalli .
in labor and travail , in watchings often , in hunger and thirst , in fastings often , and in cold and nakedness . ||| Akar tioto ' meman la pa lera dom de yanin edonna-yamat edonna , ya'an edonna-yemni edonna . Lera dom de woki nwah ' a ' u yoma a'ukleha lawra-raini .
Besides those things that are outside , there is that which presses on me daily , anxiety for all the assemblies . ||| Ne hade edon nmeh ' a mere la ' lera-ler nek de a ralmu worworga , yoma aghoratnan walia krei-krei re honona .
Who is weak , and I am not weak ? Who is caused to stumble , and I do n't burn with indignation ? ||| La'pa utlin nana ir pesiayni edon naruri , de a ' muana a ralmu wolwo'la . Ne la'pa utlin nana ir e rtuini olek la do ' a-hala , de a ralmu nmolu-nhelma .
If I must boast , I will boast of the things that concern my weakness . ||| Nhi'inde miy e mitlin la rira rpo'on-rpei tiy miy , pede dodo'ondi de agiwra wuarehi wali a ' u totpena mitlina . Mere hota apuo'on nohor to ' a hya ' mak a takeni ghi ' nana .
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ , he who is blessed forever more , knows that I do n't lie . ||| Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , de Itmatromni Yesus Amlawanni me Uplerlawanni , ed mak katga de a ' g edonna u'ohpa-ulahara . E ' ed mak riy ra'uli-rawedia pa nodi liarni .
In Damascus the governor under King Aretas guarded the Damascenes ' city , desiring to arrest me . ||| Mere a ' die ukleh ruri . La ' ler maka adiella ' leta Damsik ralamni , de riy mak ray Aretas nrana la mak ktorna-krautu gubernur , de ed mak khopan pa makodia keki-rautnu rhapet apitga puohra leta totpena la'pa aliergota de rtorn a ' u .
I was let down in a basket through a window by the wall , and escaped his hands . ||| Mere riy dom de rala lo'ora ida ra rhurierni a ' liola lutur leta hu'ulli ida . Hade pede uwlar dioinia gubernur de pa aliewan wa .
It is doubtless not profitable for me to boast , but I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , plollolli de itpo'on lawna de edon nodia unut mai ita . Mere yoma miy mitlin la rira po'onni pede hota apuo'ona tiy miy wiali . Mere hota apuo'on nohor to ' a hya ' maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala pa riy matni ri'ini rpah ' nana .
I know a man in Christ who was caught up into the third heaven fourteen years ago-whether in the body , I do n't know , or whether out of the body , I do n't know , God knows . ||| Yoma la ' anni termida wehrani wogata mak itto'or la de , makpesiay ida de narian pa nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Riy di narian toto ' a onde matni ri'ini npah ' a nan to ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha uplin niohora de . Uplerlawna ed mak katga de .
I know such a man whether in the body , or outside of the body , I do n't know , God knows , how he was caught up into Paradise and heard unspeakable words , which it is not lawful for a man to utter . ||| A'ukot owa'an ralamni , agatga de riy di de rrana pa rkenia la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mere la'pa hadi narian toto ' a onde la'pa matni ri'ini npah ' a nan to ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha de uplinu-uplo ' nohora hade . Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a nek ed mak katga de . La ' hande , de riy de natlin nohora hadom maka rimormiori raplinu rwet tar mua'ta , me lira-tunu maka rlarna pa rimormior ratlin nana .
On behalf of such a one I will boast , but on my own behalf I will not boast , except in my weaknesses . ||| La riy de hihi'ini-yapyapni ed mak agiwra upo'on arehi-alawna wniahaurnu , mere a ' g edonna upo'ona-ulawna a inon wamueh ' u . La ' a ino'nu de hota awuahaur nohora hya ' ed mak atia'eni ghi ' nana nanpena a upo'on arehi-alawna .
For if I would desire to boast , I will not be foolish , for I will speak the truth . But I refrain , so that no man may think more of me than that which he sees in me or hears from me . ||| Mere plollolli de riy de a ' u . La'pa agiwra upo'ona arehi-alawna la ' mak a'umkek nande ho'mana , mak a'ukota de lol talanni yoma ha toto ' hade . Mere hota a ' g edonna wuahauria owa'an hade , mere agho ' tar lia wniahauru mak emkade , totpena riy edonna ratot nana a nhio'lu-lie'tu yoma a ma'tu npah ' nana maka upo'ona-ulawan nohora , mere onnila ramkek nan memna a wniehwa-liaktu mak kden rer lia plol wawna onde e ratlin nana a li'ru mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna .
By reason of the exceeding greatness of the revelations , that I should not be exalted excessively , a thorn in the flesh was given to me , a messenger of Satan to torment me , that I should not be exalted excessively . ||| Meman neka la a ma'tu npah ' a nana mak karehi-kalawan la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mere Uplerlawna Nal a ' pua alier la mehra-mau ida , mak emolmolla hegana amlawanni karkiarni . Mehra-mau de werat rehia narieiniande apuolpuol i'nu-wuakwak a'mu . Hade emkade totpena yana apuo'on arehi-alawna la ' a hya ' a mak a ma'tu npah ' a nan la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Concerning this thing , I begged the Lord three times that it might depart from me . ||| La'pa asiumbain nana re'eni wotel lia Orgahi-Orha ' a giwra , Uplerlawnu ne ! Muheri tlinmu-mutatar matmu la ' a a wuakwa'ku di . Apuolu-wuak tiy O ' a totpena nnien di narian la a ino'nu .
He has said to me , My grace is sufficient for you , for my power is made perfect in weakness . Most gladly therefore I will rather glory in my weaknesses , that the power of Christ may rest on me . ||| Mere Orgahi-Orha ' a edon Nwayow nohora a wakwa'ku . Mere Nakot mai a ' u Niwra , Hota A ' g edon rian mehra-mau die la inonmu , mere hota Atiulan nek la tiy o ' a . Hade nekpa hade wa . Yoma la'pa omlier la kropanni-krieutnu , de A ru'ru-la'yu yeher to'ama nayamkek la inonmu . La hade pede nhi'inde a'upuo'on reria a lia ' ta'eni-mai tia'eni . Yoma la'pa atia'eni a ' u , de Yesus Kristus rurni-laini nkar lia a ino'nu .
Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses , in injuries , in necessities , in persecutions , and in distresses , for Christ 's sake . For when I am weak , then am I strong . ||| Hade pede uhepur nohora la ' a hya ' a honona mak aliernana yoma la ' a Yesus Kristus rerieini , la'pa alia ' ta'eni-muai tia'eni , onde riy rapupu-raheri a ' u onde la'pa alier la kleheni-larni , kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a , riwtu-hora . Yoma la'pa a takeni ghi ' nan hadoma , dewade Uplerlawna tutulanni-rere'eni ed mai a ' u .
I have become foolish in boasting . You compelled me , for I ought to have been commended by you , for I am in no way inferior to the very best apostles , though I am nothing . ||| Apuo'on arehi-alawna a hihi ' u-yapya'pu emeknekama riy mak kpodku nhi'inde rhi ' nana , mere yoma miy yatotmi-yarieimi pa aghi ' emkade . Yoma plollolli de miy er mak ka'ulia a ' u . Yoma la ' emkameni ho'ola a ' di lia ' ta'eni-muai tia'eni , mere a ' g edonna wuayow pa riy maka mpiet la makodi Uplerlawna lirni mak orkotkotni-ornananni , de mi'uli-miwedi ir pa narehi a ' u . Mere miy edon mi'ulia a ' u .
Truly the signs of an apostle were worked among you in all perseverance , in signs and wonders and mighty works . ||| Yoma la ' ler maka adien wut tiy miy die atiutg oleka de makodi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu plollolli a ' u yoma a'utatahan ralmu la haneknek wawannu pa aghi ' a-yapia hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona , mak ktut toto ' memna Uplerlawna rurni-laini nhi'nande riy ema rtaplelleltarga .
For what is there in which you were made inferior to the rest of the assemblies , unless it is that I myself was not a burden to you ? Forgive me this wrong ! ||| Pa a'utian tek miy ! Hya ' ed maka a ' g edonna ghi ' ma'ta tiy miy maka aghi ' a la krei wokni-wokni dom to ' a ? Enekneka a ' g edonna tiot aruk miy lia ' a a sie'wu-ka'yu toh ? ! Yanpa mpiarora de aghi ' hala yoma a ' g edonna wuak kupan tiy miy ? !
Behold , this is the third time I am ready to come to you , and I will not be a burden to you , for I seek not your possessions , but you . For the children ought not to save up for the parents , but the parents for the children . ||| Dodo'ondi de re'eni wotellu hadi wa pa agiwra tiy wualoha-wualakat la miy die . Ne hota atiy miy die , a ' g edonna uhaka miy totpena atiot aruki miy . Yoma a ' g edonna uhaka hya ' ed mak ha mhi'taru re , mere a'uhak miy totpa aghima-rie ' miy . Yoma a ' g emolmolan nekama miy ammi . Ne edonna riwra upa-a'na ed mak kahaka tiernu-apannu pa nala lahga inni-amni , mere ina-ama ed mak kahaka upa-a'na tiernu-apannu .
I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls . If I love you more abundantly , am I loved the less ? ||| Pede a ralmu nahepru la'pa agala a gah ' u honona tiy miy miana , a ' g edonna wuaror nana re , rerehniana agal a inon tete'mu pa ghima-rie ' miy . La'pa a kalwiedwe'du tiy miy emkare , ho'mana taken niana mhi ' kalwiedwed a ' u ? !
Even so , I myself did n't burden you . But you might say that being crafty , I caught you with deception . ||| Dodo'ondi de , mpiayowa de miat niohor oleka la ' a ' g edon ghi ' awerat miy lia ' a awuak kupna tiy miy . Mere hota riy e riwra , Meman neka la Paulus de edon nwak kupna mere plollolli de nhi ' wunwunamnu pa nkiwti-nkiwti ita prehenni kuku ' pa nken lia sakni .
Did I take advantage of you by anyone of those whom I have sent to you ? ||| Oi ! Ralma-riora mak emkade hota edon nla ' nana rira o'tani kriahlanu . Nhi'inde mak aghopan pa rtiy die aghopan pa e rawok kupan mai a ' u ? !
I exhorted Titus , and I sent the brother with him . Did Titus take any advantage of you ? Did n't we walk in the same spirit ? Did n't we walk in the same steps ? ||| A ' g e ghopan pa Titus e ntiy ntomar tiy miy . Me aghopan walia ita makpesiay wialli dom to ' a nor rewre'wa e ' pa rtiy . De hota mimkek teka ! Titus e ntiy miy die nawoka liola de enarehi-nalawna totpena ena'ala rehenu ? ! Edonna toh ? ! Ne amro ' a wniaror mamni la'pa kniar miamni de talla kmeh ' a pa amdella plol wawna la ' a hya'-hya ' honona toh !
Again , do you think that we are excusing ourselves to you ? In the sight of God we speak in Christ . But all things , beloved , are for your edifying . ||| Matialo'onama la ' a ralma-riormi , de la horat di ralamni , de ami e mparor mamaini talan pa amakot nohora a plol mamni ? Miy e miplinga de lirmi onde wniarormi de nhal toto ' memna . Uplerlawna e Nat niohora la ' a hya ' ed maka makota re honona , de emeka Yesus Kristus hopopanni-lili'irnu rhi ' nana . Ne la ' a hya ' ed mak amhi ' a re onde amakot nohora re ama mhedu-mtehra miy pesiaymi de totpena la ' ga ' a . Yoma miy er mak kden rer lia a ralm mamni .
For I am afraid that perhaps when I come , I might find you not the way I want to , and that I might be found by you as you do n't desire , that perhaps there would be strife , jealousy , outbursts of anger , factions , slander , whisperings , proud thoughts , or riots , ||| Yoma a ' g e umta'ata de la'pa atiomra-niah ' a miy lia hande , yanpa hota ita wniatromni de nodia a ralmu pa nmawal doin la miy hihi'imi re , me hota miy miana edon mrieiniana a hihi ' u-yapya'pu la ' ler de . Yanpa hota amuai die aliernana yahuri-yawo'ora , ihru yata-ralam yata , pleta-plet pa rira rarni nha'ata , to ' a-taiya , yalernu-yaha ' a , yapupu-yaheri , riy po'ona nor walia kokokna-rariarni .
that again when I come my God would humble me before you , and I would mourn for many of those who have sinned before now , and not repented of the uncleanness , sexual immorality , and lustfulness which they committed . ||| A'umta'at wal lia la'pa amuai die , yanhi'pa Uplerlawna ed mak kalernia a lia miy gaimi ralamni , ne hota apuolpuolu-kakakria a ' u yoma riy dom tiy miy die e rhi ' a-ryapia nhioli-lieta mak kakdeha-kaktiahli , ralira-raliai , raret yata-rahaw yata . Irhi ' yatyata-halal de la ' ler ululu , ne edonna rolin ma'ta .
This is the third time I am coming to you . At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established . ||| Ina-nara , a tallu re'eni wotellu hadi wa pa atiomtomar rer tiy miy . Ne hota amuai die , aghi ' emeknekama rhorat targa la ' Puka ralamni de niwra , La ' mak khi ' lira-tunu ida , de mak ktutrier niohora mak khi ' lira-tun die , mande riy woru onde riy wotellu , nanpena ramtatan la lira-tun die .
I have warned previously , and I warn again , as when I was present the second time , so now , being absent , I write to those who have sinned before now and to all the rest that if I come again , I will not spare , ||| Yoma awuagahniort olek miy lia ' lera amua tiomar tiy miy lia re'eni wornu . Ne la'pa la ' ler di mak it idma oliet la ' ida , de awuagahniort owa'an miy lia ' a hota a'uwali owa'an tiy miy die la re'eni wotellu , de hota agukmua riy honona mak khi ' oleka do ' a-hala , la'pa mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala la ' a ler ululu onde mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala lera-mela ri .
seeing that you seek a proof of Christ who speaks in me who is not weak , but is powerful in you . ||| Hota aghi ' emkade yoma miy orgahami er mak kwak a ' pua tiutga de Yesus Kristus ed mak khopan pa ukot nohora E lirni-tunnu tiy miy . Ne la'pa Yesus Kristus niwra Netlia miy do'omi-halmi , de edonna Nala lira mnapla mere Ntutga preheni-mkaini la ' a miy hononmi .
For he was crucified through weakness , yet he lives through the power of God . For we also are weak in him , but we will live with him through the power of God toward you . ||| Hota plol memna , la lera rkenia la auwlakra de , nmatlawra , ho'mana la ' dodo'ondi de Enmori olekwa , yoma la ' a Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni . La ' amora Yesus Kristus amla ' ihru ida-ralm ida pede a inon mamni mana emeknekama inonni mak kakleh walia ruri-lai , mere la ' a E plolli-mneheni pede ammormiori-mdardiari . Ne la ' a E plolli-mneheni de pede amukmua miy .
Examine your own selves , whether you are in the faith . Test your own selves . Or do n't you know about your own selves , that Jesus Christ is in you ? -unless indeed you are disqualified . ||| Mtia ' u tieka inon wamuehemi , hota plola la mormiormi di , de miy e mpiesiay reria Yesus Kristus me edonna ? Meman neka la hota mimi'eram reria la miy mormiormi , de Yesus Kristus etla miy mormiormi . Onde yanpa mimtiot pa mpiesiay tio ' a .
But I hope that you will know that we are n't disqualified . ||| Ne agha'ara a ralmu de la'pa miy miana mtia'ga ami de mimkek memna plollolli de Yesus Kristus hopopanni ami .
Now I pray to God that you do no evil , not that we may appear approved , but that you may do that which is honorable , though we may seem to have failed . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , amsumbain la Uplerlawna , totpena E ' ed mak ktulan tiy miy pa yana mhi ' do ' a-myap hiala . Ampak nekpa totpena miy mhi ' hadom de mliernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni . Ononni hade . La'pa ami edon mlernan talan pa mtutga a plola-mneh ' mamni emeka makodi Yesus lirni-tunnu pa mukmua miy , emkade nek wa . Hade edon nla ' a wniaror mamni .
For we can do nothing against the truth , but for the truth . ||| Yoma am di de edonna mhi ' hya'-hya ' to ' a maka klol to'am la ' a ha plollola .
For we rejoice when we are weak and you are strong . We also pray for this , your becoming perfect . ||| A ralam mamni nahepur toto ' memna la'pa miy pesiaymi naruri , kennama ami edon mtutga a plola-mneh mamni tiy miy , pede la ' riy yamkekni , de ami emeknekama mak la ' ta'eni-mai ta'eni ami . Ne amsumbain de totpena mpiali owa'an la rimormiori makdella plol wawna la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
For this cause I write these things while absent , that I may not deal sharply when present , according to the authority which the Lord gave me for building up and not for tearing down . ||| La ' hade ed mak awuarora , pede a ' u'enyatga horat di tiy miy la ' a ler mak a ' g edonna dien wut ma'ta tiy miy . Emkade totpena la'pa atiy die , yana aniairia Orgahi-Orha ' a plolli-mneheni pa amuaklekal tiy miy . Yoma plola-mneh de Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala a ' pua ga ghedu-tiehra miy , mere edonna riwra gala pa awueyata miy pesiaymi .
Finally , brothers , rejoice ! Be perfected . Be comforted . Be of the same mind . Live in peace , and the God of love and peace will be with you . ||| La ' hohoni de , ina-nara ama-hyali , awuak pa hononmi mihe ' i-mihepru ne mihak pa mpial lia rimormior makden la plol wawna la hya'-hya ' to'owa . Mrieiniana-mia'nana a lira nnio ' a-wawa nia'tu di honona tiy miy . Mlia ' a ihru ida-ralm ida la yawoka-yale'emi . Me yana mihuri-miwo'ora . Ne hota Uplerlawna mak ktorreria kalwieda-paitiota me maka ralamni nsayn miy hota Nor miy tialla .
Greet one another with a holy kiss . ||| Ne hota miy idma nwak kalwied la ida , idma nhar lirni la ida , mpiapahar lima-mpiare'et mata la ida , totpena lol talan la miy pesiaymi . Me Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona makden handi de e ra'enyatg wali lira kalwieda tiy miy .
All the saints greet you . ||| Pena Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Nala ra'ani-pallu tiy miy , Uplerlawna pena Nala sniayanni tiy miy pia Nhilpai-nmanat miy , ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mana pena Nor rer miy tialla ! A kalwied mamni tiy miy , Paulus
Paul , an apostle-not from men , nor through man , but through Jesus Christ , and God the Father , who raised him from the dead- and all the brothers who are with me , to the assemblies of Galatia , Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , krei mutnu-pepanni makden la Galatia yapatni . Paulus a ' g inhatti . Agora ita inni-narni makpesiay honona mak kor wut a lia handi , de ampak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de Nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy . Aga'ala kniari pa a'ukot nohora Yesus lirni-tunnu , de la ' rimormiori id mana edonna ntutmuata-nkewra ' a nan ntutga a ' u , mere onnila Yesus Kristus Nora it Amlawanni Uplerlawna maka kamori-kalewan nan owa'ana E la matmiatni ralamni , ed mak ktutmuata-kewra ' a nan a ' u .
who gave himself for our sins , that he might deliver us out of this present evil age , according to the will of our God and Father- ||| Yesus e Nhu'ru-nhelam nohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pede E ' orgahi Nala inonni pa Nler la matmiati ralamni onnila it do'oni-halli , totpena itlernana yamori-yalewna . Enhi ' hade totpena yana tlernohora riy nohkeran di yatyatni-halalli maka rhi ' a-ryap niohora la lera-mela ri .
to whom be the glory forever and ever . Amen . ||| Haleluya la ' a Uplerlawna la'pa nodia pa nodi liarni , Amin Plola .
I marvel that you are so quickly deserting him who called you in the grace of Christ to a different good news , but there is n't another good news . Only there are some who trouble you and want to pervert the Good News of Christ . ||| Agheduma tiy miy hononmi ! Yoma Uplerlawna Npolga miy pia mlia ' E mutnu onnila Yesus Kristus mormiorni-lewlewanni maka mliernana yoma Yesus Kristus Ntulla-nsayn nan miy . Mere la ' lera-mela ri , de mipleta-plet pa mhioitio'or la Uplerlawna , pa mliernohora owa'ana mak ha riwra kot kalwieda , mere kot de lol to ' a la Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni mak kaplola mak kakot nohora Yesus Kristus . Mak ha riwra kot kalwied de , plollolli de Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota atia ' hade . Riy mak kakot nohora kot kalwieda-paitiota de tiy miy , de e rnairia kdiori-kdieha pede narieiniande miplin niohora talla mak kaplola me mak khala .
But even though we , or an angel from heaven , should preach to you any good news other than that which we preached to you , let him be cursed . ||| Ina-nara mitlina ! La'pa am die , onde hopopna-lili'iru mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha ho'mana er mak kakot nohora kot mak klol to ' a la Kot Kalwieda maka amakot ulg oleka wa de , ndella pa amler la Uplerlawna niukamnu pa rrinnia am la ai mormiori ralamni naraka .
As we have said before , so I now say again , if any man preaches to you any good news other than that which you received , let him be cursed . ||| Amakot ulg oleka hare wa me dodo'ondi de a'ukot owa'an la hade , de la'pa hameni nwahaur nohora mak ha riwra kot kalwieda-paitiota tiy miy , mere lol to ' a la mak amakot oleka , maka mrieinian olekwa de , awuak pa Uplerlawna Nukmua rpa hota rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni !
For am I now seeking the favor of men , or of God ? Or am I striving to please men ? For if I were still pleasing men , I would n't be a servant of Christ . ||| A'ukot emkade de a ' g edon wuaka a nan wamueh ' u onnila awuaka ya'uli la ' a rimormior wialli yoma hade edon ndella ralma-rio'ru . Mere hornama hya ' maka awuaror nan de nla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni . Pede la'pa atiot pa rimormior wia'lu ra'uli a ' pua emeknekama a nhio'lu la ler maka a ' g edon puesiay ma'ta de , yana rhoi a lia Yesus Kristus lili'irnu-hopopanni .
But I make known to you , brothers , concerning the Good News which was preached by me , that it is not according to man . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , totpa miatga , de Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak a'ukot nohora de hade edonna nwatiawua rimormiori nurnu .
For I did n't receive it from man , nor was I taught it , but it came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ . ||| Yoma a ' g edon liernan hade la ' riy ida wniatutnu-wniaye'eni onde riorni-liaini . Mere Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a ed mak kakot a lia ' hare honona .
For you have heard of my way of living in time past in the Jews ' religion , how that beyond measure I persecuted the assembly of God and ravaged it . ||| Mitlin nan oleka a mormio'ru la ulul toh ! De la ' ler maka aliernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni . La ' ler de a ' g ed mak kwahak toto ' meman pa a'umuki-uma'ala me kweyata-kwaniawua Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu .
I advanced in the Jews ' religion beyond many of my own age among my countrymen , being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my fathers . ||| La'pa rakot nohora agama Yahudi kniarni yala'ani , de a ' g ed maka klernohora Yahudi deullu-tatarni de pa nareh dioin mak kor wutu a lia tuwu ida yoma agala a ralmu tetema pa aliernohor reria deulu-tatar de , me agod niana de membela .
But when it was the good pleasure of God , who separated me from my mother 's womb and called me through his grace , to reveal his Son in me , that I might preach him among the Gentiles , I did n't immediately confer with flesh and blood , ||| Mere Uplerlawna Nwaliri olek a lia a i'nu apannu ralamni . Me la ' E ralam kalwiedni pede Npol a pua aliernohora E ' a . Ne Uplerlawna Ntutga A'nani mai a ' u Nlernohora E ralma-rior wamueheni , totpena a'ukot nohora E A'nani Kot Kalwiedni la Yahudi atia ' a re . Ne la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Ntutga A'nani mai a ' u dewade a ' g edonna lia wuahaka wniatutu-wniaye'ela ' riy ida totpena nwatutu a lia Yesus lirni-tunnu .
nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me , but I went away into Arabia . Then I returned to Damascus . ||| Ne a ' g edonna lia ' meman la Yerusalem totpa mak kala ' ul a lia makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu re rwatut a ' u . Mere alia ' meman la noha Arpa Arab na'nama uwal lia leta Damsik owa'ana .
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Peter , and stayed with him fifteen days . ||| La'pa anni wotelu rlardoinla noma a lia ' Yerusalem , totpena awuatroma Petrus . Agora Petrus mden wut pua lera termida wehrani wolim tututu .
But of the other apostles I saw no one except James , the Lord 's brother . ||| A ' g edonna gora makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu korni re mpatroma-mtahnei wiutu , enekneka Yakowsi , Itmatromni Yesus hyalli raralamni de .
Now about the things which I write to you , behold , before God , I 'm not lying . ||| Hya ' ed maka aghorat taru ri de ha raplola . Uplerlawna Nat niohora , de a ' g edonna ulahara .
Then I came to the regions of Syria and Cilicia . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma agodi lia'ru la noha Siria , me la ' walia noha Kilikia .
I was still unknown by face to the assemblies of Judea which were in Christ , ||| La ' lera-mela re makpesiay Yesus Kristus , de wokni-le'enu makden Yudea re , edonna rat niohor ma't a ' u .
but they only heard , He who once persecuted us now preaches the faith that he once tried to destroy . ||| Mere ha ratlin nan to ' a la ' rira wniahaurnu , de riwra , Paulus maka ululu kamuki-kama'ala ami , ema rwaldioinia pa nakot nohora pesiay la Yesus Kristus . Pesiay die ed mak ululu ha niwa nweyata-nwaniawua .
So they glorified God in me . ||| La ' hade pede honona re ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu yoma la ' a hya ' maka Enhi ' nana la a mormio'ru ralamni .
Then after a period of fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas , taking Titus also with me . ||| La'pa anni termida wehrani wogat wa noma a'uwal lia Yerusalem gor rewre'wa Barnabas . Me agod walia Titus .
I went up by revelation , and I laid before them the Good News which I preach among the Gentiles , but privately before those who were respected , for fear that I might be running , or had run , in vain . ||| Alia ' a Yerusalem , yoma Uplerlawna ed mak khopna . Alia ' pa aghi ' a wniatroma-tniahnei id la ir Petrus maka miy mpieta la krei o'tani-matni . Alia ' pa a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot maka a ' g e ukot nohora la ' a Yahudi atia ' a re . Mere a'ukot nohora hare honona la ir Petrus , makla ' miy o'tami-matmi re to ' a totpena rla ' ulga pa rwayow nohora A knia'ru de . Yoma a ' g e umta'ata yanhi'pa Yahudi dom to ' a riwra rwayotli a knia'ru la ' a Yahudi atia ' a rerieini reiniande a prehenu de hamamuamua .
But not even Titus , who was with me , being a Greek , was compelled to be circumcised . ||| Titus mak kor a ' tialla de Yunani id hade , mere emkade ho'mana ir Petrus edonna rtekal memna Titus pa nlernohora deulu-tatra sunat .
This was because of the false brothers secretly brought in , who stole in to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus , that they might bring us into bondage , ||| Mere riy dom de rwakdior pia rtot pa rler teman la makpesiay totpena rwuw ami yoma riwra rhi ' yawuhi-yawe'et la it pesiayni onnila Kristus Yesus . Ir wniarorni de totpena rtot it pa tlernohor owa'ana Yahudi deullu-tatarni . Ne la ' talan emkade pede riwra rhi ' it pa it edon tsa'ar owa'an it ralamni la Kristus hihi'ini pa tler la yamori-yalewna , mere rhi ' pa agama deullu-tatarni hota nodi plolli owa'an mai ita . Ir er mak ktekal memna Titus pa rsunta .
to whom we gave no place in the way of subjection , not for an hour , that the truth of the Good News might continue with you . ||| Mere ami edon mpayow nohor memn ira . Yoma ami e miwa mhi ' a totpena yana riy rwotra-rtalia Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni , maka mpiesiay oleka de .
But from those who were reputed to be important-whatever they were , it makes no difference to me , God does n't show partiality to man-they , I say , who were respected imparted nothing to me , ||| Ina-nara , la ' a miy wniarormi de miy o'tami-matmi Petrus , Yakowsi , me Yohansi er maka ra'uli , mere la a yamke'ku de ha ramneneh momuou yoma Uplerlawna edon Namkek la rira gaini . Ne la ' ler de nekane miy o'tami-matmi re edon ral walia lira-nnio ' a wawa-niat warwuaru mai a ' u totpa a'ukot nohora walia hade la'pa awuatutu riy .
but to the contrary , when they saw that I had been entrusted with the Good News for the uncircumcised , even as Peter with the Good News for the circumcised- ||| Rwaldioinia de mak khi ' o'ta-mata re , ir er maka kpesiaya de Uplerlawna ed maka ktutmuata-kewra ' a pua ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot della riy maka Yahudi atia ' a , emekwalima Uplerlawna E Nhopna olek walia Petrus pa nodia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot della riy Yahudi .
for he who worked through Peter in the apostleship with the circumcised also worked through me with the Gentiles- ||| Yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kala ruri-lai la Petrus pa nwalia makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu la riy Yahudi . Emkade walia Uplerlawna Nal walia ruri-lai mai a pua a ghi ' walia makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu la riy maka Yahudi atia ' a .
and when they perceived the grace that was given to me , James and Cephas and John , those who were reputed to be pillars , gave to Barnabas and me the right hand of fellowship , that we should go to the Gentiles , and they to the circumcision . ||| Yakowsi , Petrus me Yohansi maka miy mhioiya la krei wokni-le'enu o'tani-matni mak karehi-kalawna , nekane rreiniana agora Barnabas wali pa emeka ira kniarwialli . Pede rwapahar lima la ' a rerie'yu . Yoma rwarora de Uplerlawna ed mak kala kniar werwerat de la a ' u . Noma amla ' lira ida pa hota amkar lia ' riy maka Yahudi atia ' a me irkar lia riy Yahudi .
They only asked us to remember the poor-which very thing I was also zealous to do . ||| Ir wotelu makhi ' o'ta-mat la Yahudi miy re edon rakota riwra a knia'ru maka a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda la Yahudi atia ' a nhala , mere rwak nek totpena yana amhi ' mat yat la riy mak kakleha-kaplara . Mere plol toto ' a de a ralmu naple'er pa agiwra ghi ' emkade .
But when Peter came to Antioch , I resisted him to his face , because he stood condemned . ||| La'pa Petrus nma nte'ela Antiokia , noma agora mawo'ora yoma a'umkek memna e hihi'ini nhala .
For before some people came from James , he ate with the Gentiles . But when they came , he drew back and separated himself , fearing those who were of the circumcision . ||| Yoma la'pa nor ulga Yahudi atia ' a ramtatan pa ra'an wutu , mere la'pa Yahudi doma mak kor wutga Yakowsi la Yerusalem rmai pia rte'ela Antiokia noma Petrus nwaldoinia pa nahmena nora Yahudi atia ' a re rewre'wa pa rwatamputu owa'ana , yoma namta'ata Yahudi mak kwatiawua Yerusalem re . Yahudi re er mak ktekal reria riy totpa rlernan deulu-tatra sunat .
And the rest of the Jews joined him in his hypocrisy , so that even Barnabas was carried away with their hypocrisy . ||| Noma ina-nara ama-hyali Yahudi dom pal miana rlernohora Petrus pede rahmena rora Yahudi atia ' a rwatamputu , kennama iratg oleka it edon tler la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu onnila itlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni mere onnila tlernohora Yesus Kristus . La'pa Barnabas mana nlernohor walia ir Petrus hihi'ini mak edon kaplol de .
But when I saw that they did n't walk uprightly according to the truth of the Good News , I said to Peter before them all , If you , being a Jew , live as the Gentiles do , and not as the Jews do , why do you compel the Gentiles to live as the Jews do ? ||| La'pa a'umkek de ir edon rlernohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota lirni mak kaplola dewade apuolliohora Petrus la ' a mutu pepanni-taurnu ralamni , agiwra , Hyalia emkameni pede omtiekal reria Yahudi atia ' re pa rlernohora Musa deullu-tatarni totpena miora mpiatamputu , mere Yahudi o ' nekane nhi'inde o ' edon mliernohora Musa deullu-tatarni ? !
We , being Jews by nature and not Gentile sinners , ||| Makden Yahudi atia ' a er mak edon klernohora agama deullu-tatarni pede rweta la ' mak khi ' do ' a-hala . Mere it di de Yahudi inhat mak kat niohora agama deullu-tatarni .
yet knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ , even we believed in Christ Jesus , that we might be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law , because no flesh will be justified by the works of the law . ||| La'pa hade ho'mana it mana tat walia de , riy ror owa'ana Uplerlawna rkalwieda yoma la ' a pesiayni la Yesus Kristus ne yoma edon riwra e nlernohor oleka agama deullu-tatarni . Pede itmeh ' a nek de tpesiaya Yesus Kristus totpena hota Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana ita pa emeka riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni , yoma la it pesiayni . Edon riwra yoma la ' a it ya'unni-yamta'atni la agama deullu-tatarni . Yoma riy id mana edon nora Uplerlawna rkalwieda onnila nlernohora deulu-tatra .
But if while we sought to be justified in Christ , we ourselves also were found sinners , is Christ a servant of sin ? Certainly not ! ||| Mere la'pa Yahudi doma rhoi it la mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala yoma itsa'ar it ralamni la Yesus Kristus totpena tora Uplerlawna tkalwieda , ne it edon tlernohora owa'ana agama deullu-tatarni , hade nnia'eratni de Yesus ed maka kariei piede itler la do ' a-hala ? Edonan nekane !
For if I build up again those things which I destroyed , I prove myself a law-breaker . ||| Mere la'pa aliernohora owa'ana agama deullu-tatarni yoma la a wniaro'ru de totpa agora Uplerlawna mkalwieda , de emekwalima a'uriri owa'ana hya ' maka a ' g e wuaye'er targ oleka . Ne hota plol toto ' a de a ' g ed mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala .
For I through the law died to the law , that I might live to God . ||| La ' ler maka aliernohora agama deullu-tatarni de , hade edon nodi a pua agora Uplerlawna mkalwieda . La ' hade pede a ' g edon liernohora owa'an agama deullu-tatarni , yoma emeknekama amuati olek la deulu-tatra yala'ani . La ' talan emkade pede hota la a mormio'ru ralamni de aghima-rie ' Uplerlawna .
I have been crucified with Christ , and it is no longer I who live , but Christ lives in me . That life which I now live in the flesh , I live by faith in the Son of God , who loved me and gave himself up for me . ||| Dodo'ondi , emekwalima agor wut Yesus Kristus ammati rewre'wa la auwlakra hananni . Pede a ' g e edonna liernohora a nhio'lu-lie'tu ululu , mere Yesus Kristus ed mak kmormior lia a ih'ru ralamni . Mormiori warwuaru mak aliernan di yoma apuesiay lia Uplerlawna A'nani . E ' ed mak ktutga ralam kalwiedni mai a ' pua Nmat lia a wawannu .
I do n't reject the grace of God . For if righteousness is through the law , then Christ died for nothing ! ||| A ' g edonna wuayotlia Uplerlawna sniayanni mai a ' u . Yoma la'pa itora Uplerlawna tkalwied owa'ana , yoma la ' a agama deullu-tatarni yatotni-yarieini , de hade emolmolan nekama Yesus Kristus matmiatni la ' a auwlakar hananni de hamamuamua .
Foolish Galatians , who has bewitched you not to obey the truth , before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly portrayed among you as crucified ? ||| Hoi , ina-nara ama hyali makden la Galatia ! Miy podakmi-padukmi lawan rehia ! Miy e mliernohora oleka he ' yawewalli ? ! Miat niohor oleka talan plollola yoma a'ukot nohor oleka Yesus Kristus matmiatni la auwlakra hananni yala'ani tiy miy wia .
I just want to learn this from you , Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law , or by hearing of faith ? ||| Mikot tek a lia ' a hya ' a rerieini pede mliernan Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli ? Miy edon mliernana Uplerlawna Nhiwni yoma mliernohora agama deullu-tatarni toh ? ! Mere onnila mitlina-mitaili Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna me mpiesiay olek la Yesus Kristus de .
Are you so foolish ? Having begun in the Spirit , are you now completed in the flesh ? ||| Mlier olek la mormiori warwuaru la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , pede hya ' ed mak kariei owa'an pa miy miwra mpial lia riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni onnila rurmi-lai wamuehemi ? Nihya'pa podakmi re emkadena de ?
Did you suffer so many things in vain , if it is indeed in vain ? ||| Miy mlier olek la nniahora-nniala ' a la ' a Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota rerieini . Ne dodo'ondi meman pa miwra mliernohora agama deullu-tatarni ? ! Hota emkade de nniahora-nniala ' maka ha mliernan de hamamuamua . Mere awuak de hota edon emkade !
He therefore who supplies the Spirit to you and does miracles among you , does he do it by the works of the law , or by hearing of faith ? ||| Ina-nara , Uplerlawna Nala E Nhiw Lululli tiy miy me Nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat pa mimkek memna toh ! Mere a'utian tek miy . Uplerlawna Nhi ' emkade yoma miy mliernohor oleka agama deullu-tatarni ? Edonna toh ! Enhi ' emkade yoma miy e mitlin oleka Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de , ne mpiesiaya Yesus Kristus .
Even so , Abraham believed God , and it was counted to him for righteousness . ||| Hadi ed maka ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni la Abraham de e riwra , Abraham npesiaya Uplerlawna , ne pesiayni de ed mak kariei pede Uplerlawna Nreililili-na'mamuau niana Abraham de pa emeknekama riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni .
Know therefore that those who are of faith are children of Abraham . ||| Hade pede mhioratreria , riy maka kpesiaya Uplerlawna de Abrahama duratni-waitni inhatta .
The Scripture , foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith , preached the Good News beforehand to Abraham , saying , In you all the nations will be blessed . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nror targ oleka hota Enreiniana Yahudi atia ' a mak kpesiaya Uplerlawna emeka riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni . E rhorat ul muemna oleka lir kalwieda-paitiot di la Puka ralamni , yoma rhorat targa Uplerlawna nnio'oni la Abrahama Niwra , Hota la o rerieimu pede A ' g ed mak kala yara ' u-yapa'lu la riy honona la ' nohkeran di wawannu .
So then , those who are of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham . ||| Abrahama npesiaya pa nlernana Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu . Emkade walia riy honona makpesiay , de hota ror wutga Abrahama rlernana yara ' a-yapalu mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna .
For as many as are of the works of the law are under a curse . For it is written , Cursed is everyone who does n't continue in all things that are written in the book of the law , to do them . ||| Mere riy mak kha'ara aranni la deulu-tatra agama , de hota honona rden la nhiorghala-wniaghala nayanni . Yoma Puka lirni e nakota de , He ' mak kiwra kor Uplerlawna rkalwieda onnila rlernohora agama deullu-tatarni , de deulu-tatra kuku ' id ho'mana hota rhi ' nan momuoga . La'pa edonan de Uplerlawna Nhorghala-nwaghal ira .
Now that no man is justified by the law before God is evident , for , The righteous will live by faith . ||| Riy id mana ta'en niana rlernohora agama deullu-tatarni honona , la'pa rmori e ' a pa la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' ler maka ha nmati toh ! Pede riy id mana edon nora Uplerlawna rkalwied , la ' onnila nlernohora agama deullu-tatarni . Itat muemn hade onnila e rhorat tar niohor olek hade wa la Puka ralamni de riwra , Enekneka riy maka kpesiaya Uplerlawna , pede hota nor Uplerlawna rkalwieda owa'ana , ne hota nmormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
The law is not of faith , but , The man who does them will live by them . ||| Mere la'pa riy ida nha'ar e aranni la deulu-tatra , de nnia'eratni edonna nha'ar aranni la Yesus Kristus pa Namori-nalewn e ' a . Yoma la ' Puka ralamni de e riwra , Riy maka klernohora agama deullu-tatarni de hota musti rlernohora deulu-tatra honona la ir mormiorni .
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law , having become a curse for us . For it is written , Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree , ||| Mere Yesus Kristus Nal inonni pa Ntuwu-nhai it la ' a it do'oni-halli . La ' talan emkade pede Nwe'er doin it la deulu-tatra mak kodi riy lia nhiorghala-wniaghala kutuk , ne E inon wamueheni ed maka kler la Uplerlawna nhiorghalli-wniaghalli la ' a it rerieini . Yesus Kristus de e riwra maka nhiorghala-wniaghala la ' a it rerieini , yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e riwra , Nhiorghala-wniaghala la riy mak kmat lia a'uriri hananni .
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus , that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith . ||| Kristus Yesus Ntuwu-nhai ita totpena Yahudi atia ' mana rlernan walia yara ' a-yapalu maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la Abraham de onnila Kristus hihi'ini . Ne totpena la ' it pesiayni pede itlernan walia Uplerlawna Nhiwni maka Nano'tar die .
Brothers , speaking of human terms , though it is only a man 's covenant , yet when it has been confirmed , no one makes it void or adds to it . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mai pia mitlin teka hya ' a maka awuahaur nohora ri , de a'ukot nohora hya ' a maka lera-lera rimormiori itsi ' a . La'pa riy rwatiehra wutga nnielu-niau ida , ne nnio ' a-niatu nnielu-niau die remni olek arak la hade wa , de hota riy id mana taken niana nlereti owa'an nnio ' a-niatu nnielu-niau die onde rherun doinia hya ' maka ha rakot oleka wa . Emkade wal lia ' Uplerlawna nnio'oni .
Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his offspring . He does n't say , To descendants , as of many , but as of one , To your offspring , which is Christ . ||| La Puka ralamni ha rhorat targa la ' a Uplerlawna nniellu-niaunu maka Enakot targa la Abraham nora duratni-waitni ida . Edon rhorat targa la Puka de nnielu-niau la Abraham duratni-waitni harahu , mere la ' a duratni-waitni id tututu . La ' hade de Yesus Kristus .
Now I say this , A covenant confirmed beforehand by God in Christ , the law , which came four hundred thirty years after , does not annul , so as to make the promise of no effect . ||| Maka agiwa ukot nohora la ' hadi de , de Uplerlawna Nakot targ ulga nnio ' de la Abraham . Dewade anni rahu wogata terampwotelu rlardoinla nanpena Uplerlawna Nala Musa deullu-tatarni . Pede Musa deullu-tatarni maka Enala la hohoni de edonna nherun doin E nnio'oni mak kala ' ulu die .
For if the inheritance is of the law , it is no more of promise , but God has granted it to Abraham by promise . ||| Yana mpiarora de itlernan yara ' a-yapalu yamori-yalewna maka Uplerlawna Nakot targa onnila tlernohora agama deullu-tatarni , yoma la'pa emkade hade nnia'eratni de it edonna tler la yara ' a-yapalu yamori-yalewna onnila Uplerlawna nnio'oni . Mere plollolli de itlernan yara ' a-yapalu yamori-yalewan di onnila Uplerlawna nnio'oni , emeknekama Abrahama nlernan walia , onnila Uplerlawna nnio'oni la e ' a yoma Uplerlawna orgahani ralam kalwiedni .
Then why is there the law ? It was added because of transgressions , until the offspring should come to whom the promise has been made . It was ordained through angels by the hand of a mediator . ||| La'pa hade emkade de la ' a hya ' owa'an pa Uplerlawna Nal owa'an agama deullu-tatarni ? Plollolli de Uplerlawna Na'itra agama deullu-tatarni la ' E nnio'oni ululu totpena itat niohora do ' a-hala . Agama deullu-tatarni de rnair to ' hade pa la'pa ntut tiar lia Abrahama duratni-waitni id hota Nmai , de Yesus inhatta maka Uplerlawna Nakottarga . La ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nala agama deullu-tatarni la Yahudi re , E hopopanni-lili'irnu er mak kodia la Musa nampena Musa nhi ' pamuli-payala pa Nakot nohora deulu-tatra de la makden Yahudi .
Now a mediator is not between one , but God is one . ||| Yoma nhi'inde la'pa rimormiori rhi ' a nnielu-niau , de ha rpolga riy dom pa rhi ' a lir letgara la nnielu-niau die . Mere la'pa Uplerlawna Nala nnielu-niau mak kala ' ulu die la Abraham , E edonna Nnairi riy pa nhi ' a lir letgara la E nnio'oni-niatnu de , yoma E orgahani Nodi plolli pa Nala nnio ' a-niatnu die .
Is the law then against the promises of God ? Certainly not ! For if there had been a law given which could make alive , most certainly righteousness would have been of the law . ||| Mere yanpa mpiarora de agama deullu-tatarni hota nora Uplerlawna nnio'oni edon ramneneha ? Mere hota edonna emkade . Yoma Uplerlawna Nnairia deulu-tatra nora E nnio'oni de . Mere la'pa plola pa Uplerlawna Nala agama deullu-tatarni totpena nodia mormiori plalahwa , de hota rimormiori nora Uplerlawna rkalwieda wali yoma rlernohora agama deullu-tatarni de . Mere hota edon emkade !
But the Scripture imprisoned all things under sin , that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe . ||| Deulu-tatra ta'en niana rodi mormiori-lewlewna yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e rakota riwra , rimormioria nohkerna wawannu de rawniutu-raknioholia do ' a-hala ralamni pede ta'en niana ratlin la deulu-tatra . La ' hade pede mormiori-dardiari warwuaru maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru onnila pesiay , de Enala la riy mak kpesiay lia Yesus Kristus .
But before faith came , we were kept in custody under the law , confined for the faith which should afterwards be revealed . ||| La'pa lera-mela maka Yesus Kristus edon Nmormior mia'ta la ' nohkeran di , de agama deullu-tatarni di ra rle'lu targa rimormiori totpena ratiak ita pa la'pa nte'ela lerni maka Yesus Nmormiori totpena it pesiay E ' a .
So that the law has become our tutor to bring us to Christ , that we might be justified by faith . ||| Agama de deullu-tatarni ratiaka rimormiori pa nodia pa la'pa nte'ela ler maka Yesus Kristus de Nmai totpena la ' ler de rimormiori rora Uplerlawna rkalwied owa'ana , yoma ir pesiayni la Yesus Kristus .
But now that faith has come , we are no longer under a tutor . ||| La ' lera-mela ri , de nte ' olek la lerni pa rimormiori rpesiay oleka Yesus Kristus . La ' hade pede agama deullu-tatarni mana edonna natiak olek it wa .
For you are all children of God , through faith in Christ Jesus . ||| Ina-nara , miy hononmi mpiali oleka la Uplerlawna upni-a'nani onnila miy pesiaymi la Kristus Yesus .
For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ . ||| Miy hononmi de rharani olek miy wia , totpa miora Kristus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Mrieiniana-mia'nan oleka Kristus nhiolli-liet wamueheni totpa lera-lera nekpa mliernohor reria , pa emolmolan nekama rain maka miy mniairi la ' lera-lera .
There is neither Jew nor Greek , there is neither slave nor free man , there is neither male nor female , for you are all one in Christ Jesus . ||| Emkadewa de hota Uplerlawna edonna Naheri-nahelta oleka Yahudi nora Yahudi atia ' a , me la ' a hopopna-lili'iru , ata-wa'ara onde marna-wuhura , patke ' a rora muanke ' a . Hononmi de mlia ' oleka ihru ida-ralm ida la pesiaymi la ' a Kristus Yesus .
If you are Christ 's , then you are Abraham 's offspring and heirs according to promise . ||| Miy di de Yesus Kristus gahani miy , pede emekwalima Abrahama duratni-waitni wal miy . Ne hota miy mliernan walia ra ' a-palu honona maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru .
But I say that so long as the heir is a child , he is no different from a bondservant , though he is lord of all , ||| La ' hadi de hya ' maka agiwra ukot de emkadille , de la'pa riy ida mak ktorna-ka ' a re'eni-tniarnu mere tuwnu natriapriap mia'ta , de riy de emeknek to'ama hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara mak edonna klernan hadoma . La ' a plollolli de riy de ed maka ktorna-ka ' a re'eni-tniarnu re honona , mere kuku ' ma'ta pede edon nlernan ma'ta re'eni-tniarnu re .
but is under guardians and stewards until the day appointed by the father . ||| Me riy ratiaka keke'enku ' de me rodi plolli la totpena rwatutu-rwaye ' a . Ne ratiak walia re'eni-tniarnu pa la'pa nte'ela tuwnu maka amni nanet tiar lia die .
So we also , when we were children , were held in bondage under the elemental principles of the world . ||| Hade emekwalima rimormior ita , la ' ler maka Yesus Kristus edon Ntuwu-nhai nian ma'ta ita . La ' ler de de nohkerna wniarorni-wnialaini me deullu-tatarni nodi plolli mai ita . Emkade pede it di de emolmolan neka mak edon kler ma'ta tuwu mak kerkerna pede riy rodi plolli la ita .
But when the fullness of the time came , God sent out his Son , born to a woman , born under the law , ||| Mere la'pa nte'ela lerni dewade Uplerlawna Nhopna A'nani Ntopur la nohkerna wawannu . Patke ' ida ed maka kmoria A'nani de , me A'nani de Nmori-ndar lia agama deullu-tatarni .
that he might redeem those who were under the law , that we might receive the adoption as children . ||| Nmai pia E ' ed maka kwe'er doin riy maka kmor lia agama deullu-tatarni ralamni , totpena it mana tler la Uplerlawna upni-a'nani .
And because you are children , God sent out the Spirit of his Son into your hearts , crying , Abba , Father ! ||| Ne miy die Uplerlawna a'nani olek miy wia pede Uplerlawna Nhopna E A'nani Nhiwni pa Nler la ina-nara miy ihrami ralamni . Ne la ' it ralamni mana E A'nani Nhiwni de Nmemeh ' a ed maka kler wut lia it nhiwni pede itpolu-twak la Uplerlawna de emeka Ama mak itsayni .
So you are no longer a bondservant , but a son , and if a son , then an heir of God through Christ . ||| Pede dodo'ondi de miy di de hopopna-li'iru ata-wa'ar atia ' olek miy wia , mere miy di de a'na olek miy wia , pede Uplerlawna hota Nala ra ' a-palu honona tiy miy maka Nano'targa oleka la ' a upni-a'nani .
However at that time , not knowing God , you were in bondage to those who by nature are not gods . ||| Ina-nara , ululu de , miy edonna miat mua'ta Uplerlawna pede miy mpial lia hopopan pa mitlina-mitailla uplera-upmati , mere plollolli de Uplerlawna atia ' a hade .
But now that you have come to know God , or rather to be known by God , why do you turn back again to the weak and miserable elemental principles , to which you desire to be in bondage all over again ? ||| Mere dodo'ondi de miy miatg oleka Uplerlawna onde samomuounu de itakot tiwra Uplerlawna ed mak kat niohora miy wia . Noma hya ' a nrei owa'an pede miy miwra miwali owa'an la nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini me deullu-tatarni mak kakleha ruri me hamamuamua ? ! Nihya'pa miy miwra mpiali owa'an la hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara la ' a wniarorni me deullu-tatarni rena ? !
You observe days , months , seasons , and years . ||| Dodo'ondi de mimuki-mihepur nohora lerlalawna maka agama deullu-tatarni ha raluli-rahon nohora la ' a lera-mela , wenu-wolla , la'pa me'eta-anni .
I am afraid for you , that I might have wasted my labor for you . ||| A ih'ru e wolwo'la , yanhi'pa a prehenu-ma ' u la ' miy di de nwal lia hamamuamua .
I beg you , brothers , become as I am , for I also have become as you are . You did me no wrong , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali ! Awuak lilili-mamuau tiy miy , totpena mliernohora a ' u yoma a ' g edonna gha'ara a arnu la agama deullu-tatarni . Yoma aliernohor oleka Yahudi atia ' miy nhiolmi la ' ululu , de mak edon klernohora deulu-tatra . Ina-nara mikleha hal mai a ' u la ' ler ululu .
but you know that because of weakness in the flesh I preached the Good News to you the first time . ||| Miy mhioratrer mia'ta la ' ler ululu de , onnila mehra-mau mak aliernan de pede a'ula ' ul pua ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de tiy miy .
That which was a temptation to you in my flesh , you did n't despise nor reject , but you received me as an angel of God , even as Christ Jesus . ||| La ' ler de de a'umehra-umau mak emkade mere miy edonna mmiakriarni a ' u yoma a ino'nu de mak khi ' hegan la miy . Ne miy edonna mpiayotli a ' u , mere mrieinian a ' pua emeknekama mrieiniana Uplerlawna hopopanni ida , onde emekwalia mrieiniana Kristus Yesus de inon wamueheni .
What was the blessing you enjoyed ? For I testify to you that , if possible , you would have plucked out your eyes and given them to me . ||| La ' ler mak agodia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de mihepuepur reri . Mere la lera-mela ri , de mukmi-hepurmi de etla me ? Agat niohora de , la ' ler ululu de , miwra mhi ' hya'-hya ' to'owa totpena mtiulan mai a ' u . Sniayanmi mak emkade narieiniande mimiwra mkiopil matmi pa miala mai a ' u totpa ma mtiulan nan a ' u .
So then , have I become your enemy by telling you the truth ? ||| Hya ' ed mak kariei piede dodo'ondi de mhi ' a ' u emeknekama arwalmi yoma a'ukot nohora ha plollola tiy miy ? !
They zealously seek you in no good way . No , they desire to alienate you , that you may seek them . ||| Mak kwatutu rira pa rlernohora deulu-tatra re e rlekur wenna pa mliernohor ira . Mere ralma-riorni re yata . Ir e rwahak totpena rleretia it pamulli-payalli totpena mial toto ' a ihrami ralamni penpuenu tetema pa mliernohor ira .
But it is always good to be zealous in a good cause , and not only when I am present with you . ||| Plola , ha samoga pa mial ralammi tetema pa mlier la ga ' a , hornama mliernohora hya ' mak kaplola . Ne mial ralammi tetema de la'pa nodi liarni , yanpa adien to ' pa emkade mere atio'or wa dewade onanwa .
My little children , of whom I am again in travail until Christ is formed in you- ||| U'pu-a'nu mak kden rer lia a ralmu , emeknekama patke ' mak kler la mehra-mau yoma niwa nmori a'nani de , agala a ru'ru-la'yu mehra-ma ' u pa god miy pesiaymi la ga ' a . Ne hota aghi ' emkade pa nodi liarni la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lerni maka Yesus Kristus nhiolli-lietni nayamkek la miy mormiorni .
but I could wish to be present with you now , and to change my tone , for I am perplexed about you . ||| Awuakwak de agor miy lia hande totpena aniairi lir dom to ' a pa twahaur nohora . Yoma emkadi de a'uplin niohora hya ' nariei piede mliernohora lira-tunu mak edon kaplola re !
Tell me , you that desire to be under the law , do n't you listen to the law ? ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kiwra kmori-kdar lia Musa deullu-tatarni , yanpa miplin niohor ma'ta hya ' maka e rhorat targa la Mus Pukni ? !
For it is written that Abraham had two sons , one by the servant , and one by the free woman . ||| La ' hade de e rhorat targa riwra , Abraham a'nani riy woru . Id inni de ata-wa'ara . Id inni de marna-wuhura .
However , the son by the servant was born according to the flesh , but the son by the free woman was born through promise . ||| A'na maka inni ata-wa'ar de nmoria de , yoma la ' rimormiori wniayow wamueheni . Mere la ' rimormioria marna-wuhur de , nmoria a'nani de yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kano'targa la ' Abraham .
These things contain an allegory , for these are two covenants . One is from Mount Sinai , bearing children to bondage , which is Hagar . ||| Abraham hawni rora re er maka rhi ' a la lira yawalliohora . Patke ' a rora de emekto ' a nnio ' a woru . Abraham hawni mak kwawa Hagar emekto ' a nnio ' a ida . E ' de , emekto ' a wo'or Sinai , la ' gen miaka Uplerlawna Nala agama deullu-tatarni . Hagar de nwal lia in la ' riy honona makla ' emolmolan neka ata-wa'ar la agama deullu-tatarni .
For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia , and answers to the Jerusalem that exists now , for she is in bondage with her children . ||| Pede Hagar de emekwalima wo'or Sinai inhatta makden la noha Arpa Arab . Ne Hagar de emekwalima let Yerusalem wali . Yoma makden hande rwal lia ata-wa'ar la agama deullu-tatarni .
But the Jerusalem that is above is free , which is the mother of us all . ||| Mere Abraham hawni marna-wuhur de mak kwawa Sara emekto ' a nnio ' a id walia . E ' de , de emolmolan neka leta Yerusalem makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . E ' ed maka kwal lia in la it hononita mak edon kla ' ata-wa'ar la agama deullu-tatarni .
For it is written , Rejoice , you barren who do n't bear . Break out and shout , you who do n't travail . For the desolate women have more children than her who has a husband . ||| Yoma emekto ' a rhorat targa la ' Puka ralamni de e riwra , Muhepur toto ' memna pat mak a'na genni nkeran pa kakleh a'na , mumuki-muhepru kennama o ' edonna mliernan ma'ta mehra ya ' a'na . Yoma pat maka muanke'eni edon napal niana ho'mana , nlernana upa-a'na rahu pa nareh dioinia pat maka muanke'eni ndella onni .
Now we , brothers , as Isaac was , are children of promise . ||| Pede ina-nara miy die , mpiali olek la Uplerlawna upni-a'nani onnila Uplerlawna nnio'oni la Abraham , pede miy emolmolla Sara a'nani Isak maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa .
But as then , he who was born according to the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the Spirit , so also it is now . ||| La ' ler delloo , de Hagar a'nani maka kmor die onnila rimormiori ralam wamueheni , de namuki-nama'ala Sara a'nani , maka ha rmoria de yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli yodni , emkade wal lia ' dodo'ondi , de mak kha'ar aranni la deulu-tatra pa rler la yamori-yalewna de rnahora-rnala ' a ita mak kha'ar it aranni la ' pesiay la ' Uplerlawna .
However , what does the Scripture say ? Throw out the servant and her son , for the son of the servant will not inherit with the son of the free woman . ||| Mere e rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de , e riwra , Mhiokargota at patke ' de nor wutga a'nani . Yoma ha a'nani hota edonna nor wut lia a'na pat maran de pa rlernan amni re'eni-tniarnu .
So then , brothers , we are not children of a servant , but of the free woman . ||| Hade pede ina-narmi miy re , it di de ata patke ' a a'nani atia ' ita , makhi ' ata-wa'ar la ' agama deullu-tatarni . Mere it di de emeka pat marna upni-a'nani pede itsa'ar it aranni la ' pesiay la Uplerlawna .
Stand firm therefore in the liberty by which Christ has made us free , and do n't be entangled again with a yoke of bondage . ||| Ina-nara , Yesus Kristus Nwe'er doin olek it la agama deullu-tatarni . La ' hade pede mtiutrier pitpitu me yana mpiayow nohora riy pa rhi ' owa'an miy lia deulu-tatra atni-wa'arni .
Behold , I , Paul , tell you that if you receive circumcision , Christ will profit you nothing . ||| Ora nhioratmi . A orgah ' u Paulus ed mak kakota di ! La'pa mpiayow pa rsunat miy totpa miora Uplerlawna mkialwieda , hade nnia'eratni de , hya ' maka Yesus Kristus Nhi ' nana la it rerieini nakleh eti perkun la ' tiy miy .
Yes , I testify again to every man who receives circumcision that he is a debtor to do the whole law . ||| Ne a'ukot owa'an ralamni la ' miy , la ' a riy maka kwak pa rsunta totpena nora Uplerlawna rkalwieda de nnia'eratni de hota e orgahani nlernohora agama deullu-tatarni honona . La'pa edonan de hota edon nora Uplerlawna rkalwieda .
You are alienated from Christ , you who desire to be justified by the law . You have fallen away from grace . ||| La'pa mpiaka pa mior Uplerlawna mkialwieda yoma mliernohora agama deullu-tatarni , nnia'eratni de mior oleka Yesus Kristus yala'wutmi npahokar tar wua . La ' talan emkade pede mhioitio'or doin la Uplerlawna sniayanni mai ita .
For we through the Spirit , by faith wait for the hope of righteousness . ||| Mere la ' am die , la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiwni kniarni la ' a ralam mamni pede amawniair la Uplerlawna , de hota amora E ' a mkalwieda onnila a pesiay mamni la Yesus Kristus .
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision amounts to anything , but faith working through love . ||| Yoma la'pa itora Kristus Yesus ihru ida , de tlernohora onde edonna tlernohora deulu-tatra sunat , de edonna nodi oruli-augewta pa itora Uplerlawna tkalwieda . La ' a plollolli de enekneka pesiay la Kristus , ne it pesiayni de ed maka riy ramkeka la ita kalwiedni la it rimormior wialli .
You were running well ! Who interfered with you that you should not obey the truth ? ||| Ululu de mpiesiaya Yesus Kristus la talan plollola , mere la'pa dodo'ondi de miy edon mliernohora hya ' mak kaplol owa'ana . He ' ed mak kaga ' u nian miy ? ! Miy die emolmolan nek wali me mak kawlari ida , nwaleran pa nler ul lia hohoni mere mak kawlari dom to ' rhi ' a tertieri-tawtawa .
This persuasion is not from him who calls you . ||| Plola pa tertieri-tawtaw de edonna nwatiawua Uplerlawna mak kpolg olek miy pia mlia ' E upni-a'nani .
A little yeast grows through the whole lump . ||| Riy rwatutu-rwaye ' a mak khala oke ' to ' ho'mana hota wnieyata-wnianiawua momuou . Hota emolmolan nekama rkeni tgo ' oke ' to'ola wetra ' ota mere hota nwah ' a petna honona .
I have confidence toward you in the Lord that you will think no other way . But he who troubles you will bear his judgment , whoever he is . ||| Emkade ho'mana , apuesiaya la Orgahi-Orha ' a de hota miy edonna mliernohora riy meheni ralma-riorni . Mere la'pa he ' maka khi ' miy ralammi pa worworga de hota Uplerlawna ed mak kukmua .
But I , brothers , if I still preach circumcision , why am I still persecuted ? Then the stumbling block of the cross has been removed . ||| Ina-nara , alier la nniahora-nniala ' a yoma awuatutu giwra onnila Yesus matmiatni la auwlakra hananni pede itora Uplerlawna tkalwied owa'ana . A wniatu'tu de nareiniande makden Yahudi re rawenna . Mere la'pa aliernohora a nhio'lu la ler maka a ' g edon pesiay pa a ' g e wuatutu mua'ta de rsunta nanpena rkalwied la Uplerlawna , de hota makden Yahudi edon rnahora-rnala ' a ' u yoma edon rawenan la ' a hya ' maka awuatutu re .
I wish that those who disturb you would cut themselves off . ||| Ne ! Awuak totpa mak kaga ' u nian miy onnila rwatutu sunat , de hota rmeh ' a neka rtet dioin memna ir orgahani molli-ma'ani momuou !
For you , brothers , were called for freedom . Only do n't use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh , but through love be servants to one another . ||| Mere ina-nara , Uplerlawna edon Npolga miy pia mpial lia hopopan la ' deulu-tatra , mere Npolg olek miy pia mpial lia riy maka ha rwe'er doinia la deulu-tatra . Mere yanpa mhiapar rer lia lewlewanmi de pa mhi ' a-myap nieka yatyatni-halalli maka miy ralammi nko ' i nana . Rwaldioinia , la ' plollolli de , idma ntutga ralam kalwiedni la ida yoma idma natu nhima-nre ' ida .
For the whole law is fulfilled in one word , in this , You shall love your neighbor as yourself . ||| Agama deullu-tatarni honona er momuou lia deulu-tatar di , Miatu mtiulla-msiaynia mira ' a-mipal wualia rimormior wialmi pa emekwalima mimkek reria inon wamuehemi .
But if you bite and devour one another , be careful that you do n't consume one another . ||| Mere la'pa miodi liarmi la miy idma nhi ' yatyat la ida pa emeknekama oha nor ahu idma nho'wa-nrautu ida , de erammi , hota la ' mormiormi de idma nweyata-nwaniawu ida .
But I say , walk by the Spirit , and you wo n't fulfill the lust of the flesh . ||| Ina-nara , hade pede a'ukot tiy miy die , mliernohora Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli ralma-riorni . La'pa miy e mhi ' emkade de hota miy edon mhi ' a-myapia yatyatni-halalli maka miy ralammi nko ' i nana .
For the flesh lusts against the Spirit , and the Spirit against the flesh , and these are contrary to one another , that you may not do the things that you desire . ||| Yoma yatyatni-halalli maka miy ralammi nko ' i nana nora Uplerlawna Nhiwni wniayownohorni edon ramneneha . Yoma rimormiori ralma-riorni me Uplerlawna ralma riorni emeknekama ra'ara la ihrami ralamni pede ta'en niana mhi ' a hya ' maka miy miwra mhi ' a .
But if you are led by the Spirit , you are not under the law . ||| Mere la'pa mliernohora Uplerlawna Nhiwni lirni , miy edon miwniatiehr wut lia deulu-tatra totpena mlia ' nan Uplerlawna ralamni .
Now the deeds of the flesh are obvious , which are , adultery , sexual immorality , uncleanness , lustfulness , ||| Yatyatni-halalli maka rimormiori ralamni re nko ' i nana de , hota itamkek memna la ira wniehwani-liakatni , emeka nhiol yatyata mak kakdeha-kaktiahli mak ka'hira ralma-riora pa naplinu nodi inonni me nalira-naliai ,
idolatry , sorcery , hatred , strife , jealousies , outbursts of anger , rivalries , divisions , heresies , ||| la'pa nhioi-tniani la uplera-upmati , ne lira-yatu nohkerna , idma edon ntelan nana-naut nan ida , la'pa idma nwuwu id la ' a yahuri-yawo'ora , payah ' a , plet pa rarni nha'ata , ne ntota-nwud tio'ola inon wamueheni , me ntet liodna-nlihir altawi .
envy , murders , drunkenness , orgies , and things like these , of which I forewarn you , even as I also forewarned you , that those who practice such things will not inherit God 's Kingdom . ||| Me la ' walia naralam mehra yoma ta'en niana namkek rira kalwiedni , npehera-nma'wu , na'ana-nemnia lawan rehia pede hota nreiniande hihi ' a-yapyapi yatyata-halala , ne la ' hya ' a-hya ' to ' a . La ' hare honona de a'ukot miy lia dodo'ondi , emekwalima maka ler ululu a'ukot oleka re giwra , Riy mak mormiorni emkare de hota edon rler wut lia Uplerlawna lodanni-hairni limni-rorni .
But the fruit of the Spirit is love , joy , peace , patience , kindness , goodness , faith , ||| Rwaldioinia de , la'pa riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiwni Narialmua hota idma nara ' a-napalg ida , ramuki-rahepru , ne ramtiertierun la hare honona , edonna rwahla yatyat la ir rimormior wialli , riy idma nhi ' kalwiedweda ida , me riy idma ndenrer lia setia ida .
gentleness , and self-control . Against such things there is no law . ||| Ratu rwehwa-rlakta mnapnapla , ne ratga rodi inon wamueheni . Agama deullu-tatarni edonna nwaghala riy mak khi ' emkare .
Those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and lusts . ||| Riy mak kla ' oleka Kristus Yesus limni re rolin doinia nhioli-lieta rimormiori me ralam mak ka'hira mak kodi yatyatni-halalli la ' a hya ' a-hya ' to ' a . Hota emeknekama nhioli die ramati oleka la auwlakar hananni .
If we live by the Spirit , let 's also walk by the Spirit . ||| Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nal oleka mormiori warwuaru mai it wa . Hade pede mai pia itlernohor reria Uplerlawna Nhiwni nnio'oni-niatnu .
Let 's not become conceited , provoking one another , and envying one another . ||| Yana mitulu-mipetna me mhi ' a wniaror yatyat la rimormiori wialmi totpena miora mihuri-miwo'ora onde idma nhi ' ralam mehra la ida .
Brothers , even if a man is caught in some fault , you who are spiritual must restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness , looking to yourself so that you also are n't tempted . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa mliernana makpesiay id mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala , de miy miak klernohor reria Uplerlawna Nhiwni lirni er maka mino ' a-mi'atga totpena nawal lia kalwiedni . Mere mino ' de miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma , ne mitiaka yanhi'pa riy de nod wali miy lia klieratni .
Bear one another 's burdens , and so fulfill the law of Christ . ||| Mlier pa idma natu nhima-nre ' ida la'pa rler la hoho ' a-tawtawu pa emeknekama riy maka kakwara ha werwerta pa idma ntulan la ida . La ' talan emkade pede mitlina-mitailla Yesus Kristus nhiopanni .
For if a man thinks himself to be something when he is nothing , he deceives himself . ||| La'pa riy mak kwarora de enareh dioinia e rimormior wialli , mere plollolli de edonna , de emeknekama e nalahar oleka e inon wamueheni wa .
But let each man examine his own work , and then he will have reason to boast in himself , and not in someone else . ||| Mere rima-rima hota rawerta-rataili hihi ' a-yapyap wamueheni . Ne la'pa hihi'ini samoga de hota nahepur nohora . Mere yana enwarora de hya ' maka ha nhi ' nana de samomuounu nreh dioini la ' riy dom to ' a hi'ini-yapni .
For each man will bear his own burden . ||| Yoma rima-rima rmeh ' a rakwar to ' a kwar wamueheni .
But let him who is taught in the word share all good things with him who teaches . ||| Awuak pa miy miala kupna-kaimi onde ya'ana-yemanmi , lawra-rayanmi oke'ela riy mak kwatutga Yesus Kristus wniatutnu tiy miy .
Do n't be deceived . God is not mocked , for whatever a man sows , that he will also reap . ||| Erammi , yanhi'pa mpiotar nan milahara inon wamuehemi yoma mpiarora de mhi ' nan do ' a-hal hya ' to'owa mere Uplerlawna hota edonna Nukmua miy . Miy edonna mirehia Uplerlawna pa mpiutra-miakla E ' a . Emolmolan nekama hya ' ed maka riy rtamin la ' nhyi ' ralma hota ra'ana ha wo'oni , emkade wal lia hya ' ed maka miy mhi ' nan de , hota mliernana wniahlani .
For he who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption . But he who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life . ||| La'pa hameni rhi ' yatyatni-halalli maka ir ralamni nko ' i nana , de hota rler la nhiolli-liet wamueheni de nhierannu , de de rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni . Mere , hameni rhi ' pa rlernohora Uplerlawna Nhiwni talanni , de hota rlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna Nhiwni .
Let 's not be weary in doing good , for we will reap in due season if we do n't give up . ||| La ' hade pede ina-narmi re , yana twaror nana inon yamawu la ' a nhioli-lieta kalwiedweda re . Yoma la'pa itape'el nohora kniari re , de hota , la ler maka Uplerlawna Netlia de , itlernana ita prehenni .
So then , as we have opportunity , let 's do what is good toward all men , and especially toward those who are of the household of the faith . ||| Hade pede la'pa ita tmormiori mia'ta de , tsi ' kalwiedweda it rimormior wialli , reriehenu de la ' a makpesiay wialli .
See with what large letters I write to you with my own hand . ||| Paulus a ' g ed maka ghorta di , de pniaikni edonna nhelelma , pede mpier matmi me mhioratreria .
As many as desire to make a good impression in the flesh compel you to be circumcised , just so they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ . ||| Riy meni maka kran inonni la ' a makden Yahudi gaini ralamni , de ir er maka kwatikil pa mliernohora sunat . Mere ha rhi ' emkade totpena riy Yahudi re edon ramuki-rama'al ira . Yoma he ' mak kakot nohora riwra rimormiori nohkerna rler la yamori-yalewna hornama rpesiay to ' a Yesus Kristus matmiatni la auwlakra hananni , de hota Yahudi re ramuki-rama'ala .
For even they who receive circumcision do n't keep the law themselves , but they desire to have you circumcised , so that they may boast in your flesh . ||| Riy maka klernohora deulu-tatra sunat ho'mana edonna rlernohora deullu-tatarni honona . Mere irwatikil pa mliernohora sunat , totpena hota rran atulu ir inonni riwra miy di de mliernohor olek la ir wniatutnu sunat .
But far be it from me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ , through which the world has been crucified to me , and I to the world . ||| Mere a ' di de , a'uhmen memna rian a ino'nu pa ukot nohora ha kuku ' a id tiy miy . Eneknek to ' a la'pa ukot nohora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Nmat tiar lia auwlakra hananni . La ' E matmiatni emkade pede a ' g edon wuaror nan owa'ana nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini . Ne rimormior nohkerna di mana edon rna'erit nana a wniaro'ru .
For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything , nor uncircumcision , but a new creation . ||| Rsunat me edon ho'mana hade edonna nla ' hadoma . Mak Uplerlawna e Nahaka de twal lia rimormiori warwuaru .
As many as walk by this rule , peace and mercy be on them , and on God 's Israel . ||| Awuak pa Uplerlawna Nala kalwieda-paitiota me Ntera-ndem la E sniayanni la ' a riy maka mormiorni nlernohora mamain la wniatutnu maka na'nama a'ukota di . Ir er mak kre'ela Uplerlawna rimormiorni plollola .
From now on , let no one cause me any trouble , for I bear the marks of the Lord Jesus branded on my body . ||| Ne hota , riy id mana yana nwahak hal owa'an mai a ' u . Yoma riy ramkek la Yesus kniaunu la a ino'nu di mak ktutga a ' di de Yesus gahani a ' u . Kniau die no ' a enni la ' a ramuki-ramal a ' u yoma Yesus Kristus rerieini .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit , brothers . Amen . ||| Ina-nara , awuak de Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nala ra'ani-pallu nanaloi-nanatar miy . Amin Plola . Paulus a kalwie'du
Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God , to the saints who are at Ephesus , and the faithful in Christ Jesus , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy hononmi makla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu la Epsus . Miy er mak kdenrer lia pesiaymi setia la Yesus yoma miora Kristus Yesus mlia ihru ida-ralm ida . A ' di de Paulus maka Kristus Yesus Nhopan pa godia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni , Nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Awuak de Uplerlawna , it Amlawanni de , Nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni nanaloi-nanatar nan miy .
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ , ||| Ta'uli-tawedi , tlilili-tmamuawua Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu la ' a tutullu-lolo'oni . E ' de de Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Amni maka Yesus wal pia Nkola tieru-nawur nehla de . E ' ed mak kal oleka pripanni-fa'anni honona mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha mai ita . Pripanni-fa'anni re E Nhiwni Nodia mai ita , yoma la ' a it di de tor oleka Yesus Kristus tla oleka ihru ida-ralm id wa .
even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world , that we would be holy and without defect before him in love , ||| Yoma noha gergera-tatiah ' i ma'ta , de Enwalir nian ita totpa Nhi ' it la E kamieheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti la E yamkekni onnila itor Yesus Kristus tla ' a ihru ida-ralm ida .
having predestined us for adoption as children through Jesus Christ to himself , according to the good pleasure of his desire , ||| Me la ' E ' orgahani sniayanni pede Enwarora-nwalai oleka la ' ler ululu memna de hota Nhi ' it la a'na wamueheni pa emolmolan nekama riy ida na ' nana a'na id pa nhi ' a la a'na liahunu . La ' talan emkadi pede Nhi ' it la a'na wamueheni , yoma Yesus Kristus hihi'ini . Uplerlawna hihi'ini ri honona rlernohor E ralma-rior wamueheni me nhi ' amikri E ' a .
to the praise of the glory of his grace , by which he freely gave us favor in the Beloved . ||| E wniarorni de totpena hota ra'uli-rawedi E ' la tutullu-lolo'oni yoma E ralam kalwiedni mai ita maka kareh miemna . Ne Entut muemna E ralam kalwiedni de mai ita yoma itor E A'nani maka Enlililia , de ihru ida-ralm id wa .
In him we have our redemption through his blood , the forgiveness of our trespasses , according to the riches of his grace ||| Nlernohora E ralam kalwiedni maka kareh mieman de pede A'nani Yesus Nhuria rarni pa Nler la matmiati onnila it rerieini . Ne la ' talan emkade pede Uplerlawna Ntuwu-nhai ita . De Enamou-nawitn olek it do ' a-hala yoma itor E A'nani de tla ihru ida-ralm ida .
which he made to abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence , ||| E Nhuri-ntowria E ralam kalwiedni mai ita me Nharia it ihranu ralamni totpa itlernana kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou totpa itat niohora memna E wniarorni-wnialaini .
making known to us the mystery of his will , according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him ||| Uplerlawna E orgahi Nakot it la ' a hya ' maka E ralamni niwra nhi ' a lola Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni . Ululu de riy raplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna wniarorni de .
to an administration of the fullness of the times , to sum up all things in Christ , the things in the heavens and the things on the earth , in him . ||| Uplerlawna wniarorni de totpena la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lerni nampena Enhi ' pa hare honona la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha , me la nohkerna wawannu honona de rla ' wutg ida pa Yesus Kristus Nodi plolli la .
We were also assigned an inheritance in him , having been foreordained according to the purpose of him who does all things after the counsel of his will , ||| Uplerlawna ed maka khi ' hare honona de Nlernohora orgahi ralma-rior wamueheni . Nwalir nian olek am lia ululu memna yoma la E ralma-riorni de totpena hota amler wut lia E mutnu-rahanu , yoma amor Yesus mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
to the end that we should be to the praise of his glory , we who had before hoped in Christ . ||| Totpa am die mak kha'ar ulu a ralam mamni la Yesus Kristus de hota ma'uli-mawedi mlilili-mmamuawua Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu la tutullu-lolo'oni .
In him you also , having heard the word of the truth , the Good News of your salvation-in whom , having also believed , you were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit , ||| La ' miy miana mlier olek la makpesiay Yesus Kristus , la ler maka ha mitlina Uplerlawna nnio'oni mak kaplola la ' a Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kodia miy lia mori-lewan de . Miy e mpiesiay oleka Yesus , pede Uplerlawna Nala kniau wamueh ' a tiy miy , hade de Nhiw Lululli maka Ha Nano'taru .
who is a pledge of our inheritance , to the redemption of God 's own possession , to the praise of his glory . ||| Nhiw die ed mak karur nian ita pa hota it er maka tlernana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa mai ita makla ' E mutnu-rahanu . Hota itlernana hare honona maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru mai ita , la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nwe'er doin it do'oni-halli honona pa nodi liarni . Ya'uli-yawedi nden rer lia Uplerlawna O ' a , yoma tulmu nden la tutullu-lolo'oni !
For this cause I also , having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you and the love which you have toward all the saints , ||| Ina-nara , mlier olek la pesiay mak emkade ! Pede maka a'utlin nana mpiesiaya Itmatromni Yesus ne la ' walia miy kalwiedmi la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona
do n't cease to give thanks for you , making mention of you in my prayers , ||| a ' g edonna rien et a lia u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna , yoma miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi re . Ne awuetwet nek rer lia miy nanmi la ' a a siumbainu .
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of glory , may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him , ||| Asiumbain de totpena it Amlawanni maka ha ra'uli-rawedi , maka Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Nkola tieru-nawur nehla de , pena Nala Nhiwni tiy miy . Nhiw die ed mak kod miy lia ralma-rior samomuou totpena hota la'pa Enakot nohor Uplerlawna tiy miy die , de miat niohor memn E ' a .
having the eyes of your hearts enlightened , that you may know what is the hope of his calling , and what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints , ||| Awuak wal lia de pena Uplerlawna ed mak kharia ihrami-ralammi totpena hota miat niohora yamori-yalewna maka mpiewiei-mniarnara , maka Uplerlawna Ntutg oleka la miy pa mliernana onnila Npolg miy pia mlia ' E mutnu-rahanu , ne totpena miat niohor memna la ra'ani-pallu , pripanni-fa'anni , kalwiedni-paitiotni maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' targ oleka la ' a E mutnu-rahanu .
and what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe , according to that working of the strength of his might ||| Ne awuak walia totpena miat niohora Uplerlawna rurni-laini mak kareh miemna maka Nnairia pa na Ntulan la it mak kpesiay . Uplerlawna rurni-laini plolli-mneheni mak kar lia it ihranu ralamni de , ed maka
which he worked in Christ when he raised him from the dead and made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places , ||| Uplerlawna Nnairia pa na Namori-nalewn owa'an Yesus la matmiati ralamni , me Narian owa'an la gen miaka ha rhu'ru-rhelma la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , la ' a Uplerlawna liwangen tiutullu de walli malganna .
far above all rule , authority , power , dominion , and every name that is named , not only in this age , but also in that which is to come . ||| Pede la ' hohoni dewade Yesus Kristus de Nareh mieman momuoga hya ' to ' a mak kdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha , me mak kdella nohkerna wawannu . E ' ed mak ktorna-krautia o'ta-mata lodna-hairi honona . La'pa makden la noha darni wo'itu mana Enodi plolli la . E ' ed mak kodi plolli la lera-mela ri me mak kamtatan la liwangen tiutullu la ' lera-mela maka kmai niekpa nodi liarni .
He put all things in subjection under his feet , and gave him to be head over all things for the assembly , ||| Uplerlawna ed maka karu ' u-katowar nana hare honona totpena Yesus ed mak kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu , ne Uplerlawna Nala Yesus la makpesiay re honona pa Nhi ' o'tani la .
which is his body , the fullness of him who fills all in all . ||| Makpesiay wokni-le'enu re de , de Yesus Kristus inonni inhatta . Emeknekama rhuria ger la lari ida totpa lari die penpuenu tetema , de E ' ed mak ktowria mormiorni-dardiarni , rurni-laini , kirkirni-ralma-rior samomuounu la ' a riy mak pesiay la meni-meni to ' a , yoma E ' ed mak kala mormiori-dardiari tertera-demdema la haneknek wawannu .
You were made alive when you were dead in transgressions and sins , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , ululu de , miy mmiormiori mere emeka mmiati olekwa yoma la ' a do'omi-halmi de mpiera-mdiaitia Uplerlawna nnio'oni-niatnu .
in which you once walked according to the course of this world , according to the prince of the power of the air , the spirit who now works in the children of disobedience . ||| La ' ler de de , miy e mtiaur rer lia nohkeran di yatni-halli , me mliernohora hegana amlawanni mak kodi plolli la darta-lyanti maka ha riwra noha utnu-liannu . Hegana amlawanni de ed mak kodi plolli la ' a riy maka kmalawna Uplerlawna .
We also all once lived among them in the lusts of our flesh , doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind , and were by nature children of wrath , even as the rest . ||| La ululu genni de it hononit di de emekwalima mak klernohora nohkerna gahani . Tmori niohora ita nhiolli-lietni yatyata maka it inonni ha nwahaka me mak ka'hira it ralma-riorni . La ' ler de de itler wutg olek la riy maka klernana Uplerlawna ralam mehrani .
But God , being rich in mercy , for his great love with which he loved us , ||| Mere Uplerlawna Nsayn toto ' memn ita pa Nhuria ralam kalwiedni mak kareh mieman de mai ita ,
even when we were dead through our trespasses , made us alive together with Christ-by grace you have been saved- ||| yoma la ' a plollolli de itmormiori mia'ta , mere it do'oni-halli lawan rehi pa emeknekama itmati olekwa yoma la ' a it pniera-dniayatni . Mere la ' ler maka Enamori owa'an Yesus Kristus la matmiatni ralamni , de emeknekama Enamor owa'an wali it la it matmiatni . Pede enekneka Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pede itlernana mormiori-lewlewna la E ' a .
and raised us up with him , and made us to sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus , ||| Uplerlawna Namori owa'an it tor rewre'wa Kristus Yesus pa trewre'wa tsa'at la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa tlernana plola-mneha , ya'uli-yawedi , yoma itora Kristus Yesus tla ihru ida-ralm ida .
that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus , ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' hare honona totpena la ' a lera-mela ri pa la'pa nodi liarni , de Ntut muemna Uplerlawna sniayanni mak kareh mieman de totpa honona ramkeka . Sniayn de Uplerlawna Ntutga la E ralam kalwiedni mai ita onnila Kristus Yesus .
for by grace you have been saved through faith , and that not of yourselves , it is the gift of God , ||| La ' a Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pede E Nalewan miy onnila miy pesiaymi la Yesus . Ne miy lewlewanmi de edon riwra yoma la ' a riy ruri-lai wamueheni , mere hade nwatiawua Uplerlawna sniayanni
not of works , that no one would boast . ||| totpa hota riy id mana edonna nwaror nana tulu-petna yoma wniarorni de enmeh ' a namori-nalewna e inon wamueheni onnila e hihi'ini-yapyapni wamueheni .
For we are his workmanship , created in Christ Jesus for good works , which God prepared before that we would walk in them . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka ed maka khi ' it la rimormiori warwuaru , me onnila itor Kristus Yesus tla ihru ida-ralm id wa , pede Uplerlawna Nhi ' it pa totpena hota itsi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kodia kalwieda-paitiota . Hihi ' a-yapyapi re er maka Uplerlawna Nror targ oleka la ' ululu geni pa hota itsi ' nana .
Therefore remember that once you , the Gentiles in the flesh , who are called uncircumcision by that which is called circumcision in the flesh , made by hands , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali maka Yahudi atia ' a , mhioratreria mormiormi la ululu genni . De Yahudi maka kiwra rsunat olek ir wa pede rwaror Uplerlawna mutnu ir meh ' a to ' a , er maka rhoi miy lia riy maka kaplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna yoma edonna rsunat ma't miy . Mere plollolli de rimormiori er maka khi ' nan to ' a sunat de .
that you were at that time separate from Christ , alienated from the commonwealth of Israel , and strangers from the covenants of the promise , having no hope and without God in the world . ||| La ' ler miy edon mpiesiay ma'ta de miy edon mhia'ar ma'ta aranmi la ' a Kristus me miy edon mior wutga makden Yahudi la ' a Israel , pede miy edon miwniatiehra wut lia ' a hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru la ' Abraham nora duratni-waitni . Mimdiella noh di de , miplin nohor ma'ta Uplerlawna pede mikleha hadom maka mhia'ar aranmi la totpa nodi yamori-yalewna tiy miy .
But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off are made near in the blood of Christ . ||| Ululu de oliet miy la Uplerlawna , mere dodo'ondi de onnila Kristus Yesus Nhuria rarni pa Nler la matmiatni la miy rerieimi pede mpiakrian olek la Uplerlawna , yoma miora Yesus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
For he is our peace , who made both one , and broke down the middle wall of separation , ||| Mpiakrian olek la yoma Yesus ed mak kmeh ' a khi ' kalwied ita . De E ' ed maka kawok wutga riy Yahudi rora riy Yahudi atia ' a pa rla ' wutga E mutnu-rahanu yoma Enhi ' kalwieda ir la ir ralam mehrani . Yoma emeknekama Yesus Nweyata-nwaniawu oleka lutur lawan maka ha rala ra rtawetia Yahudi nora Yahudi atia ' a .
having abolished in his flesh the hostility , the law of commandments contained in ordinances , that he might create in himself one new man of the two , making peace , ||| E ' orgahani Nala E inonni pa Nler la matmiati ralamni totpena Nhap dioinia Agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni riorni-liaini . E wniarorni de totpena Yahudi mak klernohora deulu-tatra me Yahudi atia ' a mak edon rlernohora deulu-tatra , hota rler wut lia ida , pa emeka rla ' hairi warwuaru mak kor wut E ' pa heri ida . La ' talan mak emkade pede Yesus Nhi ' kalwieda rimormiori .
and might reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross , having killed the hostility through it . ||| La ' a E matmiatni la auwlakra hananni , pede hairi rora re yawunnu-ya'arni rkalwiedwed owa'ana . Ne la ' E matmiatni de pede Nawoka-nale ' niana hairi rora re pa rla ' heri ida me Nhi ' a rpa ror Uplerlawna rkalwied wa .
He came and preached peace to you who were far off and to those who were near . ||| Yesus Nmai pia Nodia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de pa na Nakot nohora kalwieda la mak kahuri-kawo'ora , de la ' a Yahudi atia ' a miy maka ululu de oliet memna la Uplerlawna , me la ' walia riy Yahudi maka kwakrian oleka Uplerlawna wa .
For through him we both have our access in one Spirit to the Father . ||| La ' a Yesus hihi'ini de pede makden Yahudi ami me miy miak Yahudi atia ' a trewre'wa pa tlernana talan pa twakriania it Amlawanni de , yoma la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiw memeheni de niodni .
So then you are no longer strangers and foreigners , but you are fellow citizens with the saints and of the household of God , ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara mak Yahudi atia ' a miy , do'ona-dakna atia ' olek miy wa . Mere nwaldioinia de miy hononmi de mlier olek la Uplerlawna lodna-hairni limni-rorni . Miy di de Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu me romni mniotni olek miy wia .
being built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets , Christ Jesus himself being the chief cornerstone , ||| Ina-nara , nhi'inde rira rariria roma ida , de rkenia watu liar yanulu me wniatatgeni nhor diemade rwed lutru-rlapar wat lia . Emkade walia Kristus Yesus Nmeh ' a neka emolmolan nekama watu liar pianulu la ' a miy pesiaymi , me makwohorulu-ktatrulu , me mak kodi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu tiy miy re , emekwalima pesiaymi de wniatatgenni . Me miy die emeknekama watu-watu maka ha rnairia pa ra rwedlutria likit de .
in whom the whole building , fitted together , grows into a holy temple in the Lord , ||| Me emolmolan nekama watu-watu harahu rwal lia ' likti ida mak karuri-kalai , yoma rwed reria lutru-rlapar reria watu re la watu liar yanulu die wawannu , emkade walia Yahudi makpesiay ror wutga Yahudi atia ' makpesiay rla ' wutg ida onnila Itmatromni hihi'ini . Pede la hairi rora re rla ' wutga ida pa rwalia la roma ida maka Itmatromlawanni Nmeh ' a gahani .
in whom you also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit . ||| Me onnila miora Yesus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida de miy miana mrie'ela Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu pa mlia ' heri wiutu totpena Uplerlawna Nden rer lia miy wokmi-le'emi lola E Nhiw Lululli .
For this cause I , Paul , am the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' Uplerlawna kalwiedni de mai ita , pede Paulus a ' di asiumbain la Uplerlawna la ' a miy rerieimi . A ' di maka rken a lia roma nhio'la ralamni yoma la ' a Kristus Yesus rerieini . Yoma a'ukot nohora E lir kalwiedni de tiy makden Yahudi atia ' miy .
if it is so that you have heard of the administration of that grace of God which was given me toward you , ||| Mitlin memn oleka de , la ' a Uplerlawna kalwiedni pede Nal oleka kniar die mai a ' u totpena agodi miy pesiaymi la ' ga ' a .
how that by revelation the mystery was made known to me , as I wrote before in few words , ||| De Uplerlawna Nalhari Nakot olek mai a ' u lia hya ' maka rimormiori raplin niohora ma'ta la ' a E kniarni la Yahudi atia ' a re . Aghorat tar oleka hade la heyanan de , de edon naplahwa ,
by which , when you read , you can perceive my understanding in the mystery of Christ , ||| ne la'pa mpiaik nana , de hota miy miat niohora oleka de , de ania'erit nan memn oleka hya ' maka Uplerlawna Niwa Nhi ' a la ' a makden Yahudi atia ' a lola Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni .
which in other generations was not made known to the children of men , as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit , ||| La ' ululu de rimormiori raplin niohor ma'ta hya ' maka Uplerlawna Niwa Nhi ' a lola Kristus , mere la ' lera-mela ri de Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nalhari Nakot momuog oleka hade la ' a riy maka Ha Nwalir niana oleka re , de la ' a makodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni ror wutga makwohorulu-ktatrulu re .
that the Gentiles are fellow heirs and fellow members of the body , and fellow partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus through the Good News , ||| Hya ' maka Uplerlawna Niwa Nhi ' a de emkadilla , de la ' a riy maka Yahudi atia ' a rpesiay olek la Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de , pede hota ir mana er maka klernana yara ' a-yapalu maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' targa la Yahudi re . Me hota riy mak Yahudi atia ' a rre'ela pa ror wutga Yahudi re , rwal lia emolmolan nekama inon wamueh ' a ida de limni-lakni , tutu'uni-niernierannu . Ne Yahudi atia ' wal pia rlernana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru la E mutnu-rahanu yoma ror Kristus Yesus rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
of which I was made a servant according to the gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the working of his power . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Ntutg a pua alia ' mak khima-kre ' E ' a la ' a a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de onnila Nhuri-nwalia kalwiedni mai a ' u me la ' a E rurni-laini mak kar tioto ' meman la a ralmu .
To me , the very least of all saints , was this grace given , to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ , ||| La Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona de , a di de ed mak kakleha weli . Mere emkade ho'mana Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pede Nala kniar di mai a ' u , de totpa ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la riy maka Yahudi atia ' a . De a'ukot nohora la yara'ani-yapallu , pripanni-fa'anni , kalwiedni-paitiotni mak edonna nhoru eti mak itlernana la ' a Yesus .
and to make all men see what is the administration of the mystery which for ages has been hidden in God , who created all things through Jesus Christ , ||| Ne Enala kniari mai a ' u totpena la a ' pua riy honona rat niohora la ' talan emkameni pede hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nror targa oleka di , de hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana . Ululu-plialiaini Uplerlawna mak kakoki-kayap niana nohmarna nora lyanti ha nkadkaduw nana ed maka nawunum tar mua'ta la ' a hya ' ed maka Ha Niwa Nhi ' a .
to the intent that now through the assembly the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principalities and the powers in the heavenly places , ||| Mere la ' E wniarorni de totpa la lera-mela ri , de mak kodi plolli la darta-lyanti maka ha riwra noha utnu-liannu hota rat niohora Uplerlawna wniarorni-wnialaini kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou . Ne hota irat niohora hadi de onnila ramkek nana Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni la ' a Yahudi me Yahudi atia ' a makpesiay re .
according to the eternal purpose which he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord . ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' hare de Nlernohora hya ' ed maka Ha Nwaror targ oleka wa la ' noha gergera-tatiah ' i ma'ta . Ne la ' Itmatromlawanni Kristus Yesus matmiatni demade hota hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nwaror targa oleka de , ntutu-nte'ewa .
In him we have boldness and access in confidence through our faith in him . ||| Ina-nara , yoma itora Kristus tla ' oleka ihru ida-ralm id wa , ne la ' a it pesiayni la ' E ' a pede it edon tamta'ata trehgorgoru Uplerlawna .
Therefore I ask that you may not lose heart at my troubles for you , which are your glory . ||| La ' hare honona maka a'ukot nohora oleka di , pede awuak pa ina-nar miy re , yana ralammi nmawal mai a ' u , yoma alier la kropna-krieutu la roma nhio'la ralamni la ' a miy rerieimi . Mere hare honona de yala'ani emkade , totpena miy mlier la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
For this cause , I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , ||| Ina-nara , la ' a Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni de mai ita pede awualtiora-wualtieman la Orgahi-Orha ' a , it Amlawanni gaini ralamni pa awuak la E ' a .
from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named , ||| E ' de , makpesiay re honona mak kdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha me mak kden ma't la nohkeran di wawannu Amni eda de . Makpesiay honona re emekwalima makwa'ina-makwanara .
that he would grant you , according to the riches of his glory , that you may be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inner person , ||| Asiumbain la de awuak pa Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni mak kodi plolli-ktaryatnu me ralam kalwiedni de mak karehi-kalawna pa Nala E Nhiw Lululli na Naruri-nalai niana miy ihrami-ralammi
that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith , to the end that you , being rooted and grounded in love , ||| totpa la ' miy pesiaymi la ' a Kristus Yesus , pede E ' mana Nden rer lia miy ihrami-ralammi . Me awuak wali pia miruri-milai lia mormiormi pa mtiutga ralam kalwiedmi totpena hota miy pesiaymi de emolmolan nekama wini-hgona maka ha rtamnia de ga'arni nwahipni la nohkerna onde emeknekama roma ida wniatatgenni me riri tniutgeni-nhia'argeni pede taken niana rom de rawo'la nana .
may be strengthened to comprehend with all the saints what is the width and length and height and depth , ||| Emkade pede hota miy mior rewre'wa Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona pa mnia'erit nana Kristus de sniayanni inponni mai ita ne E sniayanni de nden nek la pa nodi liarni .
and to know Christ 's love which surpasses knowledge , that you may be filled with all the fullness of God . ||| Sniayanni de inponni nareh dioin rimormior ita kirkira-ralma-rior samomuounu . Emkade ho'mana awuak pa miat niohora Kristus kalwiedni de , totpena hota Uplerlawna yehwa-liakta nhioli-liet wamueheni mak karehi-kalawan de yeher to ' pa nden rer lia miy ralamni .
Now to him who is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or think , according to the power that works in us , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mai pia ta'uli-tawedi Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu yoma Uplerlawna Nodi plolli pa Nhi ' nana hya ' maka Eniwra Nhi ' a . Me E wniarorni la hihi'ini-yapyapni mai it de nareh dioin la hya ' maka itwarora pa twak la E ' a , Enhi ' hare honona yoma E plolli-mneheni ed mak kar lia it ihranu ralamni .
to him be the glory in the assembly and in Christ Jesus to all generations , forever and ever . Amen . ||| Mai pia ta'uli-ta'wedi tlilili-tmamuawua Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu makdella tutullu-lolo'oni onnila E plolli-mneheni mak kar lia makpesiay honona re ihranu ralamni . Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi Uplerlawna onnila Kristus Yesus hihi'ini . Ya'uli-yawedi nden rer lia O ' a Uplerlawnu Neee ! La ' dodo'ondi pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
I therefore , the prisoner in the Lord , beg you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called , ||| La ' Uplerlawna kalwiedni-paitiotni de mai ita pede , ina-nara ama-hyali miy , awuak tiy miy die totpena mmiori-mdiar niohora nhioli-lieta mak klol talla pa makpesiay rhi ' nana , yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kpolg olek miy pia mlia ' E gah wamueheni . Awuak hadi tiy miy onnila a ' di de mak kden la roma nhio'la id a ' u yoma agodia Orgahi-Orha ' a tulanni-kniarni .
with all lowliness and humility , with patience , bearing with one another in love , ||| La ' hade pede lera-ler nekpa idma natu nhu'ru-nhelm ida lol yawa , idma ntutga yehwa mnapla la ida . La'pa riy rhi ' a yatyat tiy miy onde ir wniarorni-wnialaini dom to ' a la ' miy wniarormi ho'mana mitatahan ralammi me mhiur niohora-mpiat niohora onnila miy ralam kalwiedmi .
being eager to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace . ||| Mpialiewan toto ' meman pa totpa miy mak kpesiay mlia ' a ihru ida-ralm ida . Yoma miy er maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nhi ' olek miy pia mlia ' wut lia ida . Pede yana miwo'ora mere idma nmor kalwiedwed la ida .
There is one body and one Spirit , even as you also were called in one hope of your calling , ||| Yoma makpesiay re emeknekama inona ida nmeh ' a to ' a , me mliernana Nhiw Lululli ida . La ' emkade walia Uplerlawna Npol miy die totpena mpiewiei-mniarnara yamori-yalewna ida .
one Lord , one faith , one baptism , ||| Me Orgahi-Orha'ami ida Nmeh ' a , pesiay de ida , nhiarani mana ida .
one God and Father of all , who is over all and through all and in us all . ||| Makpesiay hononmi Amlawanmi ida de Uplerlawna Nmemeh ' a . E ' ed maka kar die kte'la momuou lia hare honona , me kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu . Me E ' ed mak kden rer lia makpesiay miy hononmi ihrami-ralammi .
But to each one of us , the grace was given according to the measure of the gift of Christ . ||| Mere ina-nar miy re , la it di de rima-rima tlernana ruri-lai maka Yesus Kristus Nala totpa idma ntulan la ida pa emolmolan nekama Yesus e Nwaror nana-nwalai nian oleka wa .
Therefore he says , When he ascended on high , he led captivity captive , and gave gifts to people . ||| Pede la ' a Puka ralamni de e rhorat targa riwra , La ' lerni la Enha'at la gen tiutulu de E na nodia lidna-tauru maka Enal olek la yawa pa Ntorna , me Nma Nala limtutnu la ' a E rimormiorni .
Now this , He ascended , what is it but that he also first descended into the lower parts of the earth ? ||| La'pa itiwra Enha'ata , de nnia'eratni mana emekwalima la ulul de Enernu olek la geni kyawyawa la ' a noha wawannu .
He who descended is the one who also ascended far above all the heavens , that he might fill all things . ||| Me E ' mak kerun de mana E ' ed maka kha'at olek la gen miaka kden la tutul memna la ' a tulu-lyanti totpa nodi plolli-ntaryatnu la tulu-lyanti , me nohkerna-rai miarna wawannu .
He gave some to be apostles , and some , prophets , and some , evangelists , and some , shepherds and teachers , ||| E ' ed mak kala yara ' a-yapalu la ' a rimormiori . Rima-rima rlernana ir ruri-lai wamueheni . Enala riy dom pa rodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , dom to ' de Nala pa rwal lia makwohorulu-ktatrulu , dom to ' de rla ' a rakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a riy maka edon katlin ma'ta , dom de rwal lia o'ta-mat la krei wokni-le'enu pendeta mak kwatutu makpesiay re .
for the perfecting of the saints , to the work of serving , to the building up of the body of Christ , ||| Enala rurni-laini re totpena makpesiay re ratu rkar lia Uplerlawna kniarni yoma idma natu nhima-nre ' ida pa idma naruri-nalai nian id pesiayni , yoma ir honona de emolmolan nekama inona ida la ' a Yesus Kristus .
until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God , to a full grown man , to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ , ||| La ' hade de hota it hononit de twal lia riy ida yoma la ' a it pesiayni ida , me tamneneha la ' a wniarora-wnialai la ' Uplerlawna A'nani . Pede hota itwal lia rimormiori miaka wniarorni-wnialaini emeknekama ina-ama la ' pesiay , me ita nhiolli-lietni na'ititar rer lia emekwalima Yesus Kristus .
that we may no longer be children , tossed back and forth and carried about with every wind of doctrine , by the trickery of men , in craftiness , after the wiles of error , ||| Emkade pede hota it di de papay-lokmera atia ' olek it wa . Yoma riy mak kla ' papay-lokmera la ' pesiay , de ratlin la riy maka kanur mi'na nohor ir wniatutnu-wniaye'eni pa rodi riy la klieratni . Riy maka katlin la ir nur mi'nani de hota emekwalima kapli ida maka yo'ora-anni nod lia ' a-nod miaiya .
but speaking truth in love , we may grow up in all things into him who is the head , Christ , ||| Mere ita edon tatlin la riy mak nur mi'na . Hota rwaldioinia de itakot nohora hya ' ed mak kaplola . Ne la'pa itakot nohora hya ' mak kaplola de it idma ttut reria ralam kalwied la ida totpa hota itler la plola-mneha la ' hare honona totpa it yehwani samomuounu de na'ititar rer lia emekwalima Yesus Kristus . Ne E ' ed maka khi ' o'tani la makpesiay re honona .
from whom all the body , being fitted and knit together through that which every joint supplies , according to the working in measure of each individual part , makes the body increase to the building up of itself in love . ||| E ' ed maka khi ' makpesiay miy re pa mlia ' wutga ida me E plolli-mneheni nkar lia miy mormiormi ralamni . Pede miy idma natu ntulan-nsayn la ida pa narieiniande miy pesiaymi naruri me nla ' ga ' a . Yoma miy die emolmolan nekama lima-laka irnu-mata rawniutu-rakniohu la ' a inon tetema ida , mere rima-rima rhi ' nan to ' a kniar wamueheni totpa idma ntulan la ida .
This I say therefore , and testify in the Lord , that you no longer walk as the rest of the Gentiles also walk , in the futility of their mind , ||| La ' hade pede awuet la Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni pa ukot nohora me atiekal reria la ' yakotnohorni . Yana mmiori-mdiar owa'an pa emeknekama rimormior mak kaplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna yoma nhiolli-lietni re rlernohora wniarora-wnialai podpodku-padpadku .
being darkened in their understanding , alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them , because of the hardening of their hearts . ||| Yoma o'ta tehra re pede rakleh etia o'ta-kriahlu la Uplerlawna wniarorni . La ' hade pede wniarorni re rler olek la melmelli-kalkalamni mak kreinian ir pa raplin niohora mormiori maka Uplerlawna Nala .
They , having become callous , gave themselves up to lust , to work all uncleanness with greediness . ||| Emkade pede irakleha molmola-mama ' a la ' a temni pede rlernohora nhiol yatyatni hya ' to'owa mak ka'hira ralma riorni . Ne ralamni re rapal niana nhiol yatyatni mak ka'hira re pede rahmena rolin doin yatyat della .
But you did n't learn Christ that way , ||| Mere la ' ler maka rwatutu miy lia Yesus Kristus yala'ani de edon rwatutu olek miy pia mhioli-mlieta mmiori-mdiar lia yatyata mak emkade .
if indeed you heard him and were taught in him , even as truth is in Jesus , ||| Agat niohor meman de riy mak kakot nohor ulga Uplerlawna lirni de tiy miy die , rwatutu-rwaye ' a hya ' ed mak kaplola la ' a Yesus . Rwatutu miy onnila mpiali oleka riy mak kor E ' pa mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
that you put away , as concerning your former way of life , the old man that grows corrupt after the lusts of deceit , ||| Ha rwatutg olek miy pia miolin doinia nhiolia rimormioria ululmi mak kler olek la wniarora-wnialai mak kodia miy lia klieratni mak kodia matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa ,
and that you be renewed in the spirit of your mind , ||| me totpena miala inonmi pa Uplerlawna Nherun doin ihrami-ralammi totpa miy wniarormi-wnialaimi rwal lia mak warwuaru .
and put on the new man , who in the likeness of God has been created in righteousness and holiness of truth . ||| Rwatut wali miy pia mpial lia rimormiori warwuaru maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana de Nlernohora E yehwa wamueheni mak kaplola-kaple'era , me kmou-kwitan la do ' a-hala ralamni .
Therefore , putting away falsehood , speak truth each one with his neighbor , for we are members of one another . ||| La ' hade pede miy hononmi yana mi'ohpa-milahara . Mere mikot nohora ploini-ple'erni la mutwualmi yoma la it hononit di de Yesus inonni inhatta .
Be angry , and do n't sin . Do n't let the sun go down on your wrath , ||| La'pa miwenna , de yana yawenanmi de nodia miy lia do ' a-hala ralamni me yana idma naun tar niek id pa la'pa lera ntuin nohora
and do n't give place to the devil . ||| totpena yana hegana amlawanni nhi ' a la hautu .
Let him who stole steal no more , but rather let him labor , producing with his hands something that is good , that he may have something to give to him who has need . ||| Mak kalim yata de nolin doinia nhiolli-lietni di , me nwahaka kniari totpena nape'ela kniari pa nlernana yamanna wra'anu , totpa nre'ela ntulan walia riy mak kakleha-kaplara .
Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your mouth , but only what is good for building others up as the need may be , that it may give grace to those who hear . ||| La'pa miltieri die yana miltieria wniahoiti-wniarenna yapupu-yaheri onde yapolu-yaliella la ' miy nurmi . Mere mniair neka lira-tun mak kodia nnio ' a-niatu , mak kodia riy la kalwiedwedni . Mikot nohora hya ' maka ir ratlin la totpa lira-tunu kalwiedwed de , naruri-nalai nian ir pesiayni .
Do n't grieve the Holy Spirit of God , in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption . ||| Yana mhi ' pa Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli ralamni Nmawal doin la onnila nhiolmi-lietmi re . Yoma Uplerlawna Nala Nhiwni pa Nakniau ita la ' a E gahani , totpena hota la ' ler maka Yesus Nmai owa'an pa Namori-nalewn ita , Ha Ntutga de it er maka Ha Nwe'er doinia la do ' a-hala ralamni pa nodi liarni .
Let all bitterness , wrath , anger , outcry , and slander be put away from you , with all malice . ||| Mhiopliala hankerna-ralmha'ara , yawunu-yawenna , ralam mehra . Yana polpuolu-hawaun nohora wniahoiti-wniarenna , yapupu-yaheri , yapolu-yaliella , liokra-nhiautu . Yatyat id ho'mana yana mhi ' nana .
And be kind to one another , tender hearted , forgiving each other , just as God also in Christ forgave you . ||| Rwaldioin la de , idma nhi ' kalwieda-paitiot ida . Idma ntulla-nsayni ida . Ne it idma nhoratdoin ida do'oni-halli , pa emolmolan nekama Uplerlawna Nhoratdoinia me Namou-nawitna oleka it do'oni-halli , onnila Yesus Kristus matmiatni la ' it rerieini .
Be therefore imitators of God , as beloved children . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy di de Uplerlawna a'na sniayanni miy . Hade pede mirur mieman la pa mliernohora Uplerlawna yehwani .
Walk in love , even as Christ also loved us and gave himself up for us , an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling fragrance . ||| Mormiormi de , mliernohora kalwieda-paitiota talanni emekwalima Yesus Kristus mana Nhi ' kalwiedwed walia ita . E Nhur dioinia inonni pa rwenna onnila it rerieini de pa emeknekama nhioi-tniani persembahan mak kamikri-kaliamnia Uplerlawna ralamni .
But sexual immorality , and all uncleanness or covetousness , let it not even be mentioned among you , as becomes saints , ||| Miy di de Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu miy . Hade pede olietmi la nhioli-lieta maka yana Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu rhi ' nana re , yoma edon lol talanni . De emeka nhioli-lieta mak kodia yalira-yaliai onde pareta-pahawa mak edonna kla ' riy ihranu ralamni yoma nhioli-liet de emeka kdeha-ktiahli . Me yan memmemna ralammi rapal niana kupna-kai re ' a-tniaru . La ' a do ' a-hal mak emkare de yana mhio'la kotni-mhiai lia memannu .
nor filthiness , nor foolish talking , nor jesting , which are not appropriate , but rather giving of thanks . ||| Yan walia milgota lir yata la ' a miy nurmi . Yana mikot nohora hadom mak kakleha nhiu'ru-nhielma onde kakleha kuna , onde mpiahoiti-mpiarenna . Yoma hade edon lol talanni pa mikot emkare . Rwaldioinia de msiumbain pa mi'uli-miwed reria Uplerlawna .
Know this for sure , that no sexually immoral person , nor unclean person , nor covetous man who is an idolater , has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God . ||| Mitlina kalwiedweda inmi-narmi re ! Riy maka ralira-raliai la'pa rhi ' kdeheni-ktiahlani la ' a yareta-yahawa onde napal niana kupna-kai re ' a-tniaru , hota ir edonna rre'ela Uplerlawna Nora Yesus Kristus mutnu mak kla Uplerlawna lodna-hairni limni-rorni . Mhioratreria ! Riy mak kapal niana nohkerna gahani re emekwalima mak kola tieru-kawur nehla la uplera-upmati .
Let no one deceive you with empty words , for because of these things the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience . ||| Yan mitlin la lir wotwotarni mak kiwra yalira-yaliai , pareta-pahawa , wniahoiti-wniarenna la'pa hare honona do ' a-hal atia ' hade . Yoma Uplerlawna hankeranni-ralmha'arni hota ntai tiemna riy honona mak edon katlina-katailla E ' a pa rhi ' nan do'oni-halli re .
Therefore do n't be partakers with them . ||| Pede yana mliernohora ir pa mpiehwa-mliakat la do ' a-hala ralamni .
For you were once darkness , but are now light in the Lord . Walk as children of light , ||| Yana mhi ' emkare yoma miy niek de ululu de mdien wal lia melmelli-kalkalamni . Mere la dodo'ondi de mlier olek la Itmatromlawanni mutnu-rahanu pede emekwalima miy ed olek la lelerni . La ' hade pede mdien rer lia lelerni .
for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth , ||| Yoma mimdiella lelerni de hota miy e mhi ' nana hare honona mak kodia kalwieda-paitiota me mak kaploi-kaple'er la Itmatromlawanni yamkekni .
proving what is well pleasing to the Lord . ||| Mhi ' a-myap die mpiahak la ' a hya ' ed maka hota Itmatromlawanni ralamni Nala .
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful deeds of darkness , but rather even reprove them . ||| Yana mliernohora riy pa mpiehwa-mliakat la melmelli-kalkalamni . Wniehwa-liakta mak emkare edon perkuna . Hade pede mikot nohora hihi ' a-yapyapi re yatyatni-halalli totpena yana riy rhi ' a-ryap niohora .
For it is a shame even to speak of the things which are done by them in secret . ||| Hya ' maka riy yatyata-halala rhi ' a la yawunamnu de rakdeha-raktiahli pa it nekane tmola-tma ' a takot nohora .
But all things , when they are reproved , are revealed by the light , for everything that reveals is light . ||| Mere la'pa takot nohora hihi ' a-yapyapi maka rhi ' a la melmelli-kalkalamni yatyatni-halalli totpena yana riy rhi ' a-ryap niohora de emeknekama it ttutni wa'du pa ramkek la mela ralamni .
Therefore he says , Awake , you who sleep , and arise from the dead , and Christ will shine on you . ||| Yoma hya ' maka hitita-reprepra nhi'nande riy ramkek la melmelli . La ' hade pede riwra , Mumat doin la yaninmu ralamni , ne mmuori-mliewan la ' matmiatmu ralamni . Ne hota Yesus Kristus Nodia lelerni la miy .
Therefore watch carefully how you walk , not as unwise , but as wise , ||| Mimkek kalwiedwed la ' mormiormi wawannu . Yana miplinu-miplo ' a la mormiormi ralamni . Mhi ' inonmi de emeknekama riy mak katu .
redeeming the time , because the days are evil . ||| Mpiehwa reri-mliakat rer lia nhioli-lieta mak kodia kalwieda-paitiota yoma la ' lera-mela ri , de riy harahu rden nek la do ' a-hala ralamni .
Therefore , do n't be foolish , but understand what the will of the Lord is . ||| La ' hade pede yana mpiodku mere mpiaror kalwiedweda hya ' ed maka Orgahi-Orha ' a ralamni Nala .
Do n't be drunken with wine , in which is dissipation , but be filled with the Spirit , ||| De yana mi'ina-miemun pa mpiehera-mia'wu . Yoma hota la ' hade pede ta'eni miod nian inonmi pede mhi ' a saworni-sawarna , mpiehwa yatni-halli . Rwaldioinia de mial inonmi pa Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli la .
speaking to one another in psalms , hymns , and spiritual songs , singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord , ||| Mpiahniara ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna de miodia wniatunu-wniahniara krei-iskola totpa idma nhi ' aruri id pesiayni . Miala ihru-ralma ploi-ple'era me mi'uli-miwedia Orgahi-Orha ' a .
giving thanks always concerning all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God , even the Father , ||| La ' a hya ' to ' mana mi'uli-miwed reri Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de onnila miora Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
subjecting yourselves to one another in the fear of Christ . ||| Itsu'ru-tselma ta'unni-tamta'at olek la Yesus Kristus pede hota it mana idma natu nhu'ru-nhelma , natlina-natailla ida .
Wives , be subject to your own husbands , as to the Lord . ||| Patke ' a nhu'ru-nhelma natlina-natailla muanke'eni pa emekwalima tsu'ru-tselma tatlina-tatailla Orgahi-Orha ' a .
For the husband is the head of the wife , as Christ also is the head of the assembly , being himself the savior of the body . ||| Yoma muanke ' a ed mak khi ' o'tani la hawa pa emekwalima Yesus Kristus mak khi ' o'tani la makpesiay re mutnu-pepanni . Me E ' nek mana ed mak kamori-kalewna makpesiay re . Ne ir er mak kwalia olek la E inon wamueheni .
But as the assembly is subject to Christ , so let the wives also be to their own husbands in everything . ||| Emekwalima makpesiay re mak kru ' u-ktowr olek la Yesus Kristus , de hawa patke ' a mana natlina-natailla hawni muanke ' a la ' hya ' to'owa .
Husbands , love your wives , even as Christ also loved the assembly and gave himself up for her , ||| Hawa muanke ' a re , mtiulla-msiaynia patke'emi re me mpiahi ' pa mmiat lia ir wawannu , emekwalima Yesus Kristus Nsaynia makpesiay mutnu pede Nal inonni pa rwenna la ' a hare rerieini .
that he might sanctify her , having cleansed her by the washing of water with the word , ||| Yesus Nhi ' emkade totpena Nhi ' ir la E rimormiorni ne Namoga makpesiay re la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni , yoma Nnairia gera pa na Nharania , me Nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ira .
that he might present the assembly to himself gloriously , not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing , but that she should be holy and without defect . ||| Enmeh ' a neka Nhi ' emkade totpa Nhi ' makpesiay re la E gah wamueheni mak kmou-kwitan la E yamkekni yoma rakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti . Emkade pede makpesiay re emolmolan nekama patke ' maka liplipa-kamka'ma nohora lelli-kdielli , lawra-raini yoma ntutu-nte ' olek la lerni pa nora muanke'eni de rmehlima .
Even so husbands also ought to love their own wives as their own bodies . He who loves his own wife loves himself . ||| Hawa muanke ' a re , miatu mtiulla-msiayni hapmi pa emeknekama Yesus Nsayni mutnu-rahanu . Mtiulla-msiaynia patke'emi de emekwalima miy orgahami mimkek la inon wamuehemi . Yoma riy maka ktulla-ksayni hawni de , emekwalima ensaynia inon wamueheni .
For no man ever hated his own flesh , but nourishes and cherishes it , even as the Lord also does the assembly , ||| It edonna twatrom nan ma'ta rimormiori ida mak edon natiak rer lia e inon wamueheni . Rwaldioinia de rima-rima ramkek rer lia , me natiak reria ir inon wamueheni pa emekwalima Yesus Kristus wal pia Ntera-ndema makpesiay re wokni-le'enu .
because we are members of his body , of his flesh and bones . ||| Entera-ndem ita yoma it di de emeknekama Yesus Kristus inonni limni-lakni tutu'uni-niernierannu ita .
For this cause a man will leave his father and mother and will be joined to his wife . Then the two will become one flesh . ||| Ina-nara , la ' Puka ralamni de riwra , La ' hade pede hota a'na muanke ' a ida naltarga inni-amni pa la nora hawni rla ' wutga ida totpa rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
This mystery is great , but I speak concerning Christ and the assembly . ||| Hya ' maka a'ukota de nnia'eratni kdielma . Ne a ' g e gala mehlim de la yawalliohora la ' a Yesus Kristus loini-talanni la ' a makpesiay re wokni-le'enu .
Nevertheless each of you must also love his own wife even as himself , and let the wife see that she respects her husband . ||| Mere a'ukot walia mehlim de tiy miy giwra , hawa muanke ' a miy die miatu mtiulla-msiayni hapmi pa emekwalima mimkek la inon wamuehemi . Me la ' a hawa patke ' a miy miana mhiu'ru-mhielam la hapmi .
Children , obey your parents in the Lord , for this is right . ||| Upa-a'na , yoma miora Itmatromni Yesus mlia ' lir ida pede mitlina-mitailla inmi-ammi yoma hade naplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Honor your father and mother , which is the first commandment with a promise , that it may be well with you , and you may live long on the earth . ||| Mhiu'ru-mhielam la inmi-ammi nayanni totpena mliernana Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu me mdien aplahwa la nohkerna wawannu . Yoma Uplerlawna Nakot targa oleka ra'ani-pallu me mormiori plalahwa de la upa-a'na maka katlina-katailla Uplerlawna riorni-liaini di . Riora-liai di , de nala ' ulga riora-liai honona mak Uplerlawna Nal walia ra'ani-pallu la he ' mak katlina-katailla riora-liai die .
You fathers , do n't provoke your children to wrath , but nurture them in the discipline and instruction of the Lord . ||| Ne makla ' a ama miy die , de yana miaklekal la miy upmi-a'nami pa narieiniande a'nami de nahankeran rer lia miy . Mere mitiak rer kalwiedweda miy a'nami re me mpiatutu-mpiaye ' a totpa rlernohora hya ' mak kla ' Itmatromlawanni ralamni .
Servants , be obedient to those who according to the flesh are your masters , with fear and trembling , in singleness of your heart , as to Christ , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali makla ' a hopopna-lili'iru , ata-wa'ara , de miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma mi'unni-mimta'at la upmi-matrommi la ' nohkerna wawannu di . Mial ralammi tetema pa mhima-mrie ' a hare pa emekwalima mi'unni-mimta'ata Yesus Kristus orgahani .
not in the way of service only when eyes are on you , as men pleasers , but as servants of Christ , doing the will of God from the heart , ||| Yana mpiei pia matrommi erla romni nayanni nampena mkiar toto ' a totpena ra'uli miy . Mere miala ralammi tetema pa mhima-mrie ' a upa-matrommi re pa emolmolan nekama mhima-mrie ' a Yesus Kristus . La ' talan emkade pede mial ralammi tetema pa mliernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
with good will doing service as to the Lord and not to men , ||| Yana prei-pre'et nohora tulanmi-kniarmi , mere mhi ' nana re pa emekwalima miy e mhima-mrie ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a E orgahani .
knowing that whatever good thing each one does , he will receive the same good again from the Lord , whether he is bound or free . ||| Yoma miat memn oleka de , hopopan miy onde upa-matroma ho'mana , hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala rima-rima kniar kalwiedwedmi wniahlani .
You masters , do the same things to them , and give up threatening , knowing that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven , and there is no partiality with him . ||| Ne riy mak kla ' a upa-matroma miy miana , de mhi ' wali nhioli-lieta kalwieda-paitiota la ' a hopopanmi re . Yana miwenan la ata-wa'armi re pa miaklekla-makdiainia re . Mhioratreria , mior hare de , miy o'tami ida . La ' hade de Orgahi-Orha ' a makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Ne E ' edonna Naheri-nahelta rira herni-gaini .
Finally , be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might . ||| Ina-nara ama hyali , mitlin la a li'ru hohoni di , onnila miora Orgahi-Orha ' a mlia ' olek la ihru ida-ralm ida pede hota miatu miruri-milai niohora ruri-lai mak kareh mieman de , maka ha mliernana la ' a E ' a .
Put on the whole armor of God , that you may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil . ||| Emolmolan nekama mak ka'ara re rnairi keki-rautu ar ralma honona totpa ra ratutga tertieri-tawtaw mak kwatiawu arwalli , de miy miana mniairia Uplerlawna kekni-rautnu totpena mtiutrier tertehra la ' ler maka hegana amlawanni niwa ntot nan miy lia klieratni .
For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood , but against the principalities , against the powers , against the world 's rulers of the darkness of this age , and against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenly places . ||| Yoma it edonna tora rimormiori ta'ara mere itora hegana amlawanni nora e hopopanni-lili'irnu mak kodi plolli la nohkeran di melmelli-kalkalamni nora darta-lyanti .
Therefore put on the whole armor of God , that you may be able to withstand in the evil day , and having done all , to stand . ||| Hade pede mniairia Uplerlawna kekni-rautnu honona totpena la'pa nte'ela lerni maka ha mliernana kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a onde totota-wudwiudi , yatyatni-halalli de miatu mtiutrier tertehra la pesiaymi . Ne la'pa nhorwua de inonmi e narur mia'ta yoma mniairia Uplerlawna kekni-rautnu re .
Stand therefore , having the utility belt of truth buckled around your waist , and having put on the breastplate of righteousness , ||| La ' hade pede mtiutrier tertehra la ' pesiaymi , yoma mtiut nieka ralma ploi-ple'era . Yoma ploloi-plele'er de emeknekama mak ka'ara ida rewni mak no ' e nehlani . Me mhioli-mlieta la plol wawna pa emek kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralma-riorni . Yoma hade de emekwalima rain mnotna la inonmi .
and having fitted your feet with the preparation of the Good News of peace , ||| Mial ralammi naplele'er pa mikot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de yoma hade emeknekama miy lakmi wniowni totpena yana mtiuini .
above all , taking up the shield of faith , with which you will be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one . ||| La ' walia de , la ' lelera-melmel de mtiorrer pitga miy pesiaymi la Itmatromlawanni . Yoma miy pesiaymi de ed mak kei dioinia hegana ra'pihini mak klomlomra .
And take the helmet of salvation , and the sword of the Spirit , which is the word of God , ||| Yamori-yalewna maka mrieinian oleka de hota emolmolan neka hya ' maka ha nahewu o'tami totpena yana arwalli kekni-rautnu ntaiya . Me mniairia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka E Nhiw Lululli Nala tiy miy pia emeka wehla ara .
with all prayer and requests , praying at all times in the Spirit , and being watchful to this end in all perseverance and requests for all the saints . ||| La ' lera-mela me la'pa la hya ' to ' de msiumbain la Uplerlawna la ' a E Nhiw Lululli niodni . La ' meni-meni to ' a me la hya ' to ' a de mrian ralammi la Uplerlawna pa msiumbain rer lia me mpiaka tniulan la E ' a . Yan memmemna minin halmi , mere msiumbain rer niek la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona .
Pray for me , that utterance may be given to me in opening my mouth , to make known with boldness the mystery of the Good News , ||| Me msiumbain walia mai a ' u totpena la ' lera-lera hya ' to ' a de Uplerlawna Ntera-ndem a lia lira-tunu mak ukotkota re totpena apuarani pia a ' g e ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de maka ululu rimormiori raplin niohor ma'ta , mere la ' dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Nalharia oleka .
for which I am an ambassador in chains , that in it I may speak boldly , as I ought to speak . ||| Onnila Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de pede awual lia mak ha rhopan doinia ida pengantara , pa agetla roma nhio'la ralamni . Mere msiumbaini totpena apuaran pia ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de yoma hade emeka klernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
But that you also may know my affairs , how I am doing , Tychicus , the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord , will make known to you all things . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Tikhikus , it hyalli mak kden rer lia it ralamni , me mak ralamni nod rer lia setia pa nhima-nre'ela Orgahi-Orha ' a kniarni hota nakot nohora miy lia ' a hya ' ed maka aghi ' a totpena miy miana miat niohor walia a kalwie'du me a tulla-knia'ru .
I have sent him to you for this very purpose , that you may know our state and that he may comfort your hearts . ||| La ' hade pede aghopna e ' pa ntiy totpena nakot nohora a kalwied mamni de tiy miy totpena nhi ' miy ralammi pa naruri-nalai .
Peace be to the brothers , and love with faith , from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Awuak de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu it Amlawanni de me Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nala kalwiedni-paitiotni me Nhi ' a makpesiay wokni-le'enu honona pa idma nara ' a-napal ida , me totpena rpesiay meman la E ' a .
Grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with incorruptible love . Amen . ||| Miy hononmi maka ralammi napal niana Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus la'pa nodi liarni , de awuak pa Uplerlawna Nala ra'ani-pallu tiy miy . A kalwie'du Paulus
Paul and Timothy , servants of Jesus Christ , to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi , with the overseers and servants , ||| A ' di Paulus mak kal horat di tiy miy , ina-nara ama-hyali mak kla ' olek la Uplerlawna mutnu , miy hononmi makden la Pilipi me mak kor oleka Kristus Yesus kla ' a lira ida . Ina-nara mak khima-kre ' a jema'ata nora o'ta-mata krei la'pa makpesiay hononmi ! Paulus agora Timotius makhi ' Kristus Yesus li'irnu-hopopanni
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| ampak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de Nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwieda-paitiota tiy miy .
I thank my God whenever I remember you , ||| Nhi'inde aghoratrer miy , de a ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna mak akola tieru-gawur nehla , onnila miy pesiaymi .
always in every request of mine on behalf of you all , making my requests with joy , ||| Nhi'inde asiumbain rer miy hononmi de agodia ralma hepuepru .
for your partnership in furtherance of the Good News from the first day until now , ||| A ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna yoma la ' ler mak na'nama mpiesiaya pa nma nte ' nan la ' ler di , de miy e mhima-mrie ' olek a ' pua takot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Yesus .
being confident of this very thing , that he who began a good work in you will complete it until the day of Jesus Christ . ||| Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a ed mak Nkar lia miy ralammi . Ne apuesiay wialia , de hota E ' ed mak Nkar lia miy ralammi pa nodi liarni la ' pa la nte'ela ' ler maka Kristus Yesus Nawal pia Nmai .
It is even right for me to think this way on behalf of all of you , because I have you in my heart , because both in my bonds and in the defense and confirmation of the Good News , you all are partakers with me of grace . ||| Plol toto ' a atiarga ralma yahepru to ' la ' a miy , de lol talanni . Yoma miy hononmi er mamain la a ralmu . Yoma la'pa adien la roma nhio'la pa awualeran pa a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Yesus de naplola , de miy hononmi mhima-mrie ' a ' pua akari kniar di , maka Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napal mai a ' u .
For God is my witness , how I long after all of you in the tender mercies of Christ Jesus . ||| Uplerlawna Nat niohora de a ' g e giwa muai tiy miy die ne asiayni miy , emekwalima Kristus Yesus ralma kalwiedni tiy miy wiali .
This I pray , that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all discernment , ||| Asiumbainia miy de , de awuak de ralammi naple'er la Uplerlawna Nora it rimormior wialli ne ralma-riormi mana naplahwa me nhioratmi mana namtemtemna la genni .
so that you may approve the things that are excellent , that you may be sincere and without offense to the day of Christ , ||| La'pa emkade de hota miy miatu mpialir oleka samomuounu ne hota miy mormiormi mana nmou-nwitna totpa mikleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lerni la ' Kristus Nawal pia Nmai .
being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are through Jesus Christ , to the glory and praise of God . ||| Hota Kristus Nkar lia miy ralammi pede , mormiormi-dardiarmi penpuenu-nanah samomuou meman la nhiolmi-lietmi ilu-wniehwami pede mak kamkeka nhiolmi-lietmi re hota rodia ya'uli-yawedi la ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
Now I desire to have you know , brothers , that the things which happened to me have turned out rather to the progress of the Good News , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , agiwra miatga de kropna-krieutu mak aliernan oleka di , edon rla ' oruli-augewat la a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Kristus Yesus . Mere rwaldioinia la de , hare honona de , ed mak katota-kariei pia rira liawanni ratlina la ' Kot Kalwied de .
so that it became evident to the whole palace guard , and to all the rest , that my bonds are in Christ , ||| De kropna-krieutu mak aliernan oleka nhi'nande riy makodi keki-rautu mak katiaka ray romni , me riy dom pali mai let di , rat momuoga la ' a Kristus kniarni rerieini pede alia ' a roma nhio'la .
and that most of the brothers in the Lord , being confident through my bonds , are more abundantly bold to speak the word of God without fear . ||| Me la ' a a rerie'yu la ' roma nhio'la , pede makpesiay oleka Kristus harahu mana yeher to'ola pesiayni raruri owa'an la Orgahi-Orha ' a pede rparan pia rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni , de edon rwadura .
Some indeed preach Christ even out of envy and strife , and some also out of good will . ||| Plola la riy dom e rakot nohor wali Kristus , yoma la ' ir ralamni ramehra , riwra totpena riy ratlin la ira wniatutnu pa edon ratlin mai a ' u . Mere la ' a dom pal die , rakot nohora Kristus yoma ralamni raplele'era mai a ' u .
The former insincerely preach Christ from selfish ambition , thinking that they add affliction to my chains , ||| Riy mak emkare de , rakot nohora Kristus yoma ir ralamni kalwieda mai a ' u . Iratga de Uplerlawna ed mak ktut a ' pua a ' g ed maka ktutga talla Kot Kalwied la ' a Yesus , de naplol memna .
but the latter out of love , knowing that I am appointed for the defense of the Good News . ||| Mere riy dom to ' de rakot nohora Kristus de ralamni nkoili . Rakot nohora de rtot to ' inon wamueheni . Rwarora de talan di ed maka hota kod a lia klieratni la ' a roma nhio'la ralamni .
What does it matter ? Only that in every way , whether in pretense or in truth , Christ is proclaimed . I rejoice in this , yes , and will rejoice . ||| Mere emkadella wa . Yoma hota emkameni ho'mana la'pa ralamni raple'era onde ralamni rkoili ho'mana hota Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Kristus de rakotkot lola pa nodi liarni pede a'uhepuepur nohora . Ne hota a ralmu nahepuepru pa nodi liarni .
For I know that this will turn out to my salvation through your prayers and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ , ||| Yoma agat niohora hota la ' a miy sniumbainmi me la ' walia Nhiw Lululli maka Yesus Kristus Nala de tultulanni mai a ' u , de kropna-krieutu maka aliernan oleka di , hota nhi'nande alier la yamori-yalewna .
according to my earnest expectation and hope , that I will in no way be disappointed , but with all boldness , as always , now also Christ will be magnified in my body , whether by life or by death . ||| Maka a ralmu nmormior lia , me agha'ara a ralmu de totpena yana a'uwlar dioinia a knia'ru . Rwaldioinia owa'ana de agha'ara a arnu , totpena la ' a lera-lera emkade mamain pa nodi liarni aliernana talan pa apuaran lia pede a ru'ru-la'yu honona la'pa amuati-muor miana alier pa alia ' a totpena Kristus Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi .
For to me to live is Christ , and to die is gain . ||| La a mormio'ru ralamni de hornama agor Kristus mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida me a hihi ' u-yapya'pu nodi ya'uli-yawedi la E ' a . Ne la'pa amuat die a'untu hade yoma agor Kristus plola pa mden wutu .
But if I live on in the flesh , this will bring fruit from my work , yet I do n't know what I will choose . ||| Mere hota la ' a mormio'ru mai nohkeran di pa akar lia Kristus kniarni ralamni , pede a'uplin niohora hameni maka awualiri .
But I am hard pressed between the two , having the desire to depart and be with Christ , which is far better . ||| Hota e rhed a ' liola talla woru . Awuak de amuati totpena ultarga nohkeran di pa a lia gora Kristus , yoma samomuounu inhatte !
Yet to remain in the flesh is more needful for your sake . ||| Mere hota miy rerieimi de ndella pa samomuounu de adien nek la nohkeran diwa .
Having this confidence , I know that I will remain , yes , and remain with you all for your progress and joy in the faith , ||| Apuesiaya hade emkade . La ' hade pede agatga de hota agora ina-nara miy hononmi , totpena aghima-rie ' miy pia miruri-milai me yeher to'ola mihepru la ' a pesiaymi la ' Itmatromlawanni ralamni .
that your boasting may abound in Christ Jesus in me through my presence with you again . ||| De la'pa hota a'uwal tiy miy die , mihepuepur nohora a ' u , yoma Kristus Yesus Nolin doini a ' pua arie ' teman la miy .
Only let your way of life be worthy of the Good News of Christ , that whether I come and see you or am absent , I may hear of your state , that you stand firm in one spirit , with one soul striving for the faith of the Good News , ||| Hornama dodo'ondi de miy mormiormi die mliernohora hya ' maka ha rakot nohora la ' Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Kristus , totpa la'pa arie ' teman tiy miy , me edonna , a'utlin de mimtiutrier tiertehra la ihru ida-ralm ida pa mriewre'wa miod niana Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota maka mpiesiay olekwa .
and in nothing frightened by the adversaries , which is for them a proof of destruction , but to you of salvation , and that from God . ||| Mlier la ga ' de yan mimta'ata arwalmi . La'pa mhi ' emkade , de hota iratga , de hota rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni . Mere miy di die hota miatga de , hota Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka Namori-nalewan miy .
Because it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ , not only to believe in him , but also to suffer on his behalf , ||| Uplerlawna ed mak kala kalwieda-paitiota tiy miy pia mpiesiay Kristus , me mak kal kalwieda-paitiot pa mlier wal lia kropanni-krieutnu onnila E rerieini .
having the same conflict which you saw in me and now hear is in me . ||| La ' hade pede dodo'ondi de mliernohora olek a ' pua mlier la kropna-krieutu , de arwalmi rhi ' oruli-augewat la Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Kristus , emekneka rhi ' olek a lia ler mak adiella Pilipi , de mieh ' a mimkeka , ne emekneka dodo'ondi rhi ' owa'an la let di pa mitlin nohora .
If therefore there is any exhortation in Christ , if any consolation of love , if any fellowship of the Spirit , if any tender mercies and compassion , ||| Kristus Ntutga ralam kalwiedni mai ita , ne itahepru yoma Nara ' a-napalga ita . Enhi ' aruri it pesiayni , me itora Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli tla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
make my joy full by being like-minded , having the same love , being of one accord , of one mind , ||| La ' hade pede dodo'ondi mhi ' teka a ralmu pa nkalwied nohora hihi'imi-yapyapmi rina . Mmior nohora mlia ' a ihru ida-ralm ida , idma ntulla-nsayni ida me mlia ' lir ida la hya'-hya ' to'owa .
doing nothing through rivalry or through conceit , but in humility , each counting others better than himself , ||| La'pa mhi ' hadom de yana mtiot to ' inon wamuehemi . Ne yana mitulu-mipetna inonmi . Mere mpialdioinia totpena rima-rima natu nhu'ru-nhelam lol yawa ne natga de mutwualli ed maka samounu rehia .
each of you not just looking to his own things , but each of you also to the things of others . ||| Mimkek la rira kleheni-larni de emekwalia mimkek la inonmi .
Have this in your mind , which was also in Christ Jesus , ||| Mhioli-mliet de mliernohora Kristus Yesus wniehwani-liakatni .
who , existing in the form of God , did n't consider equality with God a thing to be grasped , ||| La'awa plollolli de E ' de emekwalia Uplerlawna , mere E ' edonna Nala hadella hautu pa Namtatna pit niohora .
but emptied himself , taking the form of a servant , being made in the likeness of men . ||| Mere nwaldioinia de Enolin doinia hare honona , ne Nhi ' a inonni de emolmolla ata-wa'ara lili'iru-hopopna ida . Emekwalimde rimormiori mak itamkek memna .
And being found in human form , he humbled himself , becoming obedient to the point of death , yes , the death of the cross . ||| Natu Nhu'ru-nhelma , pede Nwo'la-nlekur de Nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pa la'pa Nala inonni pa rwenna . Ne matmiatni meman nek de emolmolan neka riy mak klernana nhiorghala-wniaghala la auwlakra salipa hananni .
Therefore God also highly exalted him , and gave to him the name which is above every name , ||| La ' yoma Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni de nla ' Uplerlawna ralamni , pede Uplerlawna Nran tutulga E ' a totpena ra'uli-rwedi E ' a , ne Nal walia pa Ntorna-nrautia plola-mneha maka katulu-kapetna la ' a hare honona .
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow , of those in heaven , those on earth , and those under the earth , ||| Pede hota riu ' u-tniowra la ' Yesus di de hanek-harahu wuawannu mak kdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha me mak kdella nohkerna wawannu . Ne la'pa makden la noha wikni-ray gerni mana rru ' pua ruhulia idamni me rwaltior pa rram la lia'arni .
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord , to the glory of God the Father . ||| Hota honona re rru ' u-rtowar pa rhoi lia Yesus Kristus kotni me rwet la nanni , de riwra E ' de Orgahi-Orha ' a Itmatromlawanni . La ' hade pede Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu makla ' Am la Yesus hota Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi .
So then , my beloved , even as you have always obeyed , not only in my presence , but now much more in my absence , work out your own salvation with fear and trembling . ||| Yesus Nhu'ru-nhelma pa Nlernohora Uplerlawna wniarorni la'pa Nmati . La ' hade pede ina-nara mak kden la a ralmu , miy hononmi la'pa emkamenila mhiu'ru-mhielma , mitlina-mitailia Uplerlawna la ' lera itden wut mua'ta de , emkade wali hota miy hononmi miodi ralam ya'unni-yamta'ata pa mpialeran toto ' memna totpena hihi'imi-yapyapmi rla ' Uplerlawna ralamni , emekneka riy mak Uplerlawna Nalewn oleka rhi ' nana . Miatu mhi ' a-myapia emkade la ler maka itden wut mua'ta , ne reriehenu meman la mak dodo'ondi , it idma olieta la ida .
For it is God who works in you both to will and to work for his good pleasure . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna ed maka Nmeh ' a Nkar lia miy ralammi totpena miwra mhi ' hihi ' a-yapyapi mak klernohora E ralma-riorni me Ntulan miy totpena mhi ' nana re .
Do all things without complaining and arguing , ||| La ' hade pede la ' mormiormi-dardiarmi honona de , yana miy idma nkunu-nkehena ida , me yana mihuri-miwo'ora .
that you may become blameless and harmless , children of God without defect in the middle of a crooked and perverse generation , among whom you are seen as lights in the world , holding up the word of life , that I may have something to boast in the day of Christ that I did n't run in vain nor labor in vain . ||| Mhi ' emkade , de emekwalima mtiutg oleka Uplerlawna upni-a'nani mormiorni-dardiarni , momuounu-witwitanni , me nhiolli-lietni mak kakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti mak kmor lia plol wawna la ' a riy yatyata-halala ha rden la . Mhi ' inonmi pa emekneka ai mormiori mak kodia lelerni la ' noha wawannu pa mikot nohor ir la kot mak kodia mormiori-dardiari . Hota la ' miy mormiormi mak emkade de , aghi ' a la ' a nhiaparge'nu pa uhepur nohora , la ' lerni la Kristus Nawal pia Nmai . Hade edon nhala mere naplol toto ' meman la , de a liwtu-odwu mak kodia hini-turnu .
Yes , and if I am poured out on the sacrifice and service of your faith , I am glad and rejoice with you all . In the same way , you also should be glad and rejoice with me . ||| Yanpa hota rwen a ' u , ne a ra'ru hota nwalia emeka hoihoi-tantiani la ' Uplerlawna . La'pa ha yala'ani emkade a ' muana u'uli-uwedia Orgahi-Orha ' a . Emekwali a ' u , de miy miana mpiesiay matmiati Yesus pede mial oleka inonmi tetema la ' Uplerlawna totpena mimliernohora E ralma-riorni , nhi'nande a ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna . Ne miy miana mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna la ' hari honona , pede agor wal miy pia tler la he ' i-hepru .
But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon , that I also may be cheered up when I know how you are doing . ||| Agha'ar a arnu la ' Itmatromlawanni Yesus himni-re'eni mai a ' u pa alieretniekla gala Timotius pa ntiy miy die , totpa nakot nohor a ' u totpena mlier la ralma hepru . Ne la'pa nmai owa'ana , de alier la ralma hepru la miy kotmi mai a ' u .
For I have no one else like-minded , who will truly care about you . ||| La ' a Timotius nanpena agora de ihru ida-ralm ida , pa plol toto ' meman la ' amparora miy hononmi kalwiedmi .
For they all seek their own , not the things of Jesus Christ . ||| La ' mutu korni de rmakokan nohor to ' a inon wamueheni ne edon rhe'du nana Kristus Yesus ralma-riorni .
But you know that he has proved himself . As a child serves a father , so he served with me in furtherance of the Good News . ||| Mere miy hononmi orgahami mimkek walia Timotius kalwiedni . Nor a ' pua ampaliewan la kniarni pa amakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' a Itmatromlawanni , de amro ' a emolmolla riy id nor amni .
Therefore I hope to send him at once , as soon as I see how it will go with me . ||| La ' emkade pede agha'ar a arnu la Orgahi-Orha ' a , de la ' ler meni hota agat niohora hota rolin doin a lia roma nhio'la me edonna , nanpena agal Timotius pa ntiy tieman tiy miy die .
But I trust in the Lord that I myself also will come shortly . ||| Apuesiaya hota la ' Itmatromlawanni sniayanni hota edonna nalo'on wali ne amuai tieman tiy miy wiali .
But I thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus , my brother , fellow worker , fellow soldier , and your apostle and servant of my need , ||| Ne la ' a it mutwualli Epafroditus maka miy mhiopan pa nma nhima-nre ' a ' u , de awuarora la samomuounu de atiutmuat owa'ana pa nawal tiy miy die . Enre ' olek la a ' pua ampaleran wut lia a knia'ru , me nkar lia Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni emolmolan neka riy ida mak ka'ara pa natu natahan ralamni la ' a hya'-hya ' to'owa .
since he longed for you all , and was very troubled because you had heard that he was sick . ||| Eniwra nwatrom miy hononmi ne ralamni nmolu-nhelam doin la yoma mliernana oleka e kotni de enamehra .
For indeed he was sick nearly to death , but God had mercy on him , and not on him only , but on me also , that I might not have sorrow on sorrow . ||| Plol toto ' a de la ' enamehra , me trema-trema nmati . Mere Uplerlawna sniayanni pa Nhi ' kalwieda . Nhi ' kalwied e ' de , Uplerlawna Nsayni wali a ' u totpena yana a ralmu nmawal doin la e ' a .
I have sent him therefore the more diligently , that when you see him again , you may rejoice , and that I may be the less sorrowful . ||| La ' hade ed maka a ralmu napranran pa aghopan pa enawal tiy miy totpena mihepur nohora , ne a ralmu mana namtiertiernu .
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy , and hold such people in honor , ||| Awuak pa miora Epafroditus di mpiatrom de mihepuepru nohora maimiaini , emeknekama riy id nor wuiliodan walli la ' a pesiay ida la Itmatromlawanni . Miatu mi'unni-mimta'ata he ' a-he ' to ' a , emekwalia Epafroditus .
because for the work of Christ he came near to death , risking his life to supply that which was lacking in your service toward me . ||| Yoma nhi'pa nmat lia ' ler maka nkar lia Kristus kniarni rerieini . Edon namta'ata matmiati mere nkeni matmiati la ' gaini totpa nhima-nre ' a ' u la Pilipi miy nanmi wawannu .
Finally , my brothers , rejoice in the Lord ! To write the same things to you , to me indeed is not tiresome , but for you it is safe . ||| La'pa a li'ru korkorni de ina-nara ama-hyali mitlina , miy hononmi mimuki-mihepru yoma miora oleka Itmatromlawanni mlia ' a ihru ida-ralm ida . A ralmu edon nwerta pa a'ukot nohora owa'ana la hya ' maka a'ukota la ' horta ralamni , la tiy miy lia ler maka itto'or la de . Yoma la'pa mliernohor a li'ru de hota riy ta'en niana rhi ' yatyatni tiy miy .
Beware of the dogs , beware of the evil workers , beware of the false circumcision . ||| Miy hononmi mitlina . Mi'ereram toto ' meman la riy maka kwo'la-klekur la yatyatni-halalli . Emekto ' a riy ida mak kiwra ndawra riy inonni , de ir riwra rhi ' a yatyat tiy miy pia riwra miy di de rsunta plein nampena mlia ' Uplerlawna limni ralamni .
For we are the circumcision , who worship God in the Spirit , and rejoice in Christ Jesus , and have no confidence in the flesh , ||| Plollolli de it di neka , maka kla ' olek la Uplerlawna limni ralamni . Ir de edonna . Yoma it edon tsi ' emeka hare pa tsunat to ' it inonni mere it illu-wniehwani emeka riy mak kla ' olek la Uplerlawna limni ralamni pede tkola tieru-tawur nehla la Uplerlawna , de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Ntulan mai ita . Ne ta'uli-tawedi Kristus Yesus yoma Nmeh ' a neka Nkar lia it ralamni . It edon tsa'ar it aranni la rimormiori ita pa todi it la mormiori-dardiari .
though I myself might have confidence even in the flesh . If any other man thinks that he has confidence in the flesh , I yet more , ||| A ' g edon wuarora emeka wniatikilgeni , hya ' maka nohkerna gahani pa alier la Uplerlawna limni ralamni yaho'ma nohkerna gahani harahu rehi etla mai a ' u . Yanpa riy dom to ' a rwarora de hota rha'ar aranni la ' inon wamueheni me hihi'ini wamueheni . Mere a ' di de urehi momuou ir honona . Mitlina !
circumcised the eighth day , of the stock of Israel , of the tribe of Benjamin , a Hebrew of Hebrews , concerning the law , a Pharisee , ||| A i'nu ntor a lia noha wawannu pa a le'ru wo'awa dewade rsunta a wua . A ' di Israel Yakopa upni-a'nani . Benyamina Ibrani mniotni rarni e nakpalpala a rernu . A ' di Ibrani molanni a ' u . Rakot nohor la nhiu'ru-nhielma la ' agama deullu-tatarni la Yahudi , de a ' g ed maka kler la Parisi mutnu temanni .
concerning zeal , persecuting the assembly , concerning the righteousness which is in the law , found blameless . ||| Awualeran meman totpa agodi Musa deullu-tatarni la ga ' a pa umuki-uma'ala makpesiay Yesus . Yoma awuarora de makpesiay re rhopliala Musa deullu-tatarni . La'pa rakot nohora nhiu'ru-nhielma la Yahudi deullu-tatarni de , ta'en niana riy raklak a ' u yoma aliernohora Musa deullu-tatarni honona .
However , I consider those things that were gain to me as a loss for Christ . ||| Mere hari honona maka ululu de awuarora kodi unut mai a ' u , de la ' dodo'ondi de agatga de hamamuamua re , yoma agiwra gat niohora Kristus totpa gora mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
Yes most certainly , and I count all things to be a loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus , my Lord , for whom I suffered the loss of all things , and count them nothing but refuse , that I may gain Christ ||| Rerehniana , haneka-harahu wawannu mak umkeka re agatga de edon rod unut mai a ' u , yoma maka awuarora ri de tulliawna-welwierta , de totpena agat niohora Kristus Yesus a Matromlawnu . Hade pede agolin doinia haneknek wawannu . Awuaror la ' hare honona re , de emeka haga ' u-hamda'ara , totpena aliernana Kristus .
and be found in him , not having a righteousness of my own , that which is of the law , but that which is through faith in Christ , the righteousness which is from God by faith , ||| Ne plol toto ' meman pa agora Yesus de mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Loi-talla plola la ' Uplerlawna de a ' g edonna liernohora agama deullu-tatarni . La ' taliorta-lakatrai loi-talla plol de ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna , yoma onnila tpesiaya Kristus . Emkade mamain pa la ' Uplerlawna yamkekni de a lia riy mak kden la plol wawna la Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
that I may know him and the power of his resurrection , and the fellowship of his sufferings , becoming conformed to his death , ||| Mak agiwra gatga la ' ihrieherni memna plollol memna , la ' totpena agat niohora Kristus , de totpa plolli-mneheni mak kamoria E ' la ' a matmiatni ralamni de nkar lia a ralmu . A ' g edon umta'ata lier la kropna-krieutu emeka Enlernana , ne a ' g edon umta'ata pa emek E ' pa lier la matmiati-molmuolu ralamni .
if by any means I may attain to the resurrection from the dead . ||| Yoma apuesiaya de hota amueh ' a nek de ramoria a lia matmiati ralamni .
Not that I have already obtained , or am already made perfect , but I press on , that I may take hold of that for which also I was taken hold of by Christ Jesus . ||| Plollolli de a nhio'lu-lie'tu wniehwa-liaktu edon naplol ma'ta la genni mere agodi lia'ru pa lier la ga ' a totpena emekto ' a riy ida nwarui-nwate'la siewa ida , de awualeran pa totpa agor Kristus Yesus mla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Yoma hade mak kariei pia E ' orgahani Nwarui-nwate'la nan a ' pua Nhi ' a lia gahani .
Brothers , I do n't regard myself as yet having taken hold , but one thing I do , forgetting the things which are behind and stretching forward to the things which are before , I press on toward the goal for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus . ||| Plola la ina-nara miy hononmi de , a ' g e edonna wuaror la ' a nhio'lu-lie'tu wniehwa-liaktu naplol meman ma'ta . Mere hota aghi ' owa'an emkadi . De emolmolan neka mak kawlari ida nhortaplinga hya ' maka nhoitio'or la , pa nwaleran pa nhapartiklia maka nhokra . Emkade walia a'uwlari mamain pa gharan rer nian hohoni totpa plol toto ' a a wniehwa-liaktu de emekwali Kristus wniehwani-liakatni . La ' hade pede Uplerlawna hota Npol a ' pua agor wut la E ' la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nodi liarni , onnila Kristus Yesus hihi'ini .
Let us therefore , as many as are perfect , think this way . If in anything you think otherwise , God will also reveal that to you . ||| Dodo'ondi de , it hononit de mak lokmera-papay atia ' a ita la ' it pesiayni , hota itsi ' a-tyap emek na'nama a'ukota oleka re . Mere la'pa la ' miy die , miy wniarormi dom to ' a , pena Uplerlawna ed maka Ntutga a li'ru ri raplola .
Nevertheless , to the extent that we have already attained , let 's walk by the same rule . Let 's be of the same mind . ||| Hornama it tlernohor talan maka Uplerlawna Ntutg oleka mai ita .
Brothers , be imitators together of me , and note those who walk this way , even as you have us for an example . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , awuak de mliernohor a ' u . Ne amal olek walia loi-talla plollola pa mlina-miat reria riy mak klernohora talan mamni .
For many walk , of whom I told you often , and now tell you even weeping , as the enemies of the cross of Christ , ||| Mliernohor ami yoma riy liawanni rahmena ratlina-ratailla wniatutu la ' a Yesus Nmat lia auwlakra hananni la ' a it do'oni-halli rerieini . Lera-ler a'ukot oleka hadi tiy miy wia . Ne la ' ler di de ukot owa'ana de ako ' a-kakur nohora .
whose end is destruction , whose god is the belly , and whose glory is in their shame , who think about earthly things . ||| Rimormiori mak emkare de , hota la ' hohoni dewade rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni . Yoma ratulu-rapetna inonni la ' a ir hihi'ini-yapyapni mak kodia molmola-mama ' a . Ir rhi ' neka yatyatni-halalli mak ka'hira ralma-riorni . Ir edon rlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni mere ralma-riorni re nko ' i nan to ' a hya ' maka nohkerna wniahakni .
For our citizenship is in heaven , from where we also wait for a Savior , the Lord Jesus Christ , ||| Mere it di de lodna-hairi Ilyamou-Watyatoha etla it limni ralamni . Nwatiawu walia hande Makamori-Kalewna , de Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus hota Nmai . E ' ed maka itwewiei-tnarnara .
who will change the body of our humiliation to be conformed to the body of his glory , according to the working by which he is able even to subject all things to himself . ||| It inonni maka tani na'an di hota Yesus ed maka Nawilu-nawalia it inonni pa emekwali E ' a , de samomuou memna . Hota Enhi ' a hare , yoma E ' ed mak ktorna plola-mneha pa Nhi ' a hya ' a-hya ' to'owa .
Therefore , my brothers , beloved and longed for , my joy and crown , stand firm in the Lord in this way , my beloved . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyal miy re . A ralmu napal nian miy , pa giwra umkek miy wia . Hihi'imi-yapyapmi nodia a lia yahepru pa a ' u'uli-uwed reria Uplerlawna . Atiutga oleka talan maka hota mliola . La ' hade pede ukot nohor tiy miy mak kden la a ralmu , la riy id tiy miy miana yan memmemna mpiadur la miy pesiaymi la ' Itmatromlawanni .
I exhort Euodia , and I exhort Syntyche , to think the same way in the Lord . ||| Na'ru Eoudia me na'ru Sintike ! Awuakwak tiy miy die , yan mihuri-miwo'ora mere mlia ' rer lia ralm ida emekto ' a nhioli-lieta ilu-wniehwa la riy makpesiay oleka .
Yes , I beg you also , true partner , help these women , for they labored with me in the Good News with Clement also , and the rest of my fellow workers , whose names are in the book of life . ||| La ' walia kniarwia'lu maka kdenreri setia , awuak wal tiy o ' pa mrie'ela mhima-mrie ' a patke ' a rora re , totpena rla ' ralm ida . Irora de , raprehena-ramau nohor oleka a wua , pa rre'ela rakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni emekwalimde Klemen nor wut wualia riy honona re wal pia mak kor a ' pua mkari rewre'wa . Honona nanni re Uplerlawna Nken tiarg oleka la puka mak rhorat targa riy nanni mak hota rler la mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
Rejoice in the Lord always ! Again I will say , Rejoice ! ||| Awuakwaka tiy miy die totpa ralammi rahepru , yoma mliernohor oleka Orgahi-Orha ' a . Ukot owa'an tiy miy mimuki-mihepur reri .
Let your gentleness be known to all men . The Lord is at hand . ||| Mdien rer lia ralam kalwieda la ' riy honona pa la'pa rhi ' yatyatni tiy miy die miy edonna mpiahla . Hota edon nalo'on wal pia Orgahi-Orha ' a hota Nawal pia Nmai .
In nothing be anxious , but in everything , by prayer and petition with thanksgiving , let your requests be made known to God . ||| Yan memmemna ralammi wolwo'la la hadomdoma . Mere la ' a hya ' a to ' pa , mrian ralamni la ' Uplerlawna me mikot nohora hya ' ed maka nodi miy lia ralam wolwo'la . Ne mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna yoma E ' ed maka Nara ' a-napalu miy .
And the peace of God , which surpasses all understanding , will guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus . ||| Ne hota Uplerlawna Nala kalwiedni-paitiotni la ihrami-ralammi pa miy ralam namtiertiernu , totpena Natiaka kirkirmi-ralma-riormi onnila miora Kristus Yesus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Uplerlawna kalwiedni-paitiotni de narehelia rimormiori kirkirni-ralma-riorni honona .
Finally , brothers , whatever things are true , whatever things are honorable , whatever things are just , whatever things are pure , whatever things are lovely , whatever things are of good report , if there is any virtue and if there is anything worthy of praise , think about these things . ||| Demade hononmi mkienia mak kalwieda-paitiota la ' ihrami-ralammi . Mpiaror nohora hya ' mak kaplola , de mak kodi ya'uli-yawedi , hya ' maka samomuou ne mak kakleha do ' a-hala . Mpiaror nohora hare , yana mpiaror nohora yatyatni-halalli .
Do the things which you learned , received , heard , and saw in me , and the God of peace will be with you . ||| Mpiehwa-mliakta de mliernohora hya'-hya ' honona maka aghi ' a me awuatut tiy miy . Ne hota Uplerlawna mak kala ralam mtiertiernu hota Nor miy tialla .
But I rejoice in the Lord greatly that now at length you have revived your thought for me , in which you did indeed take thought , but you lacked opportunity . ||| A ' u'uli-uwed reri Orgahi-Orha ' a yoma la ' mahnek memna la ' wniarormi mai a lia dodo'ondi . Plollolli de miy edon mhioratdoinia a lia mere miy edonna mliernana talan ma'ta pa mi'enyatg owa'an kupna mai a ' u , nodia pa dodo'ondi .
Not that I speak because of lack , for I have learned in whatever state I am , to be content in it . ||| Ralul a'uhmen memna pia a'ukot nohora a kleh ' u-la'ru . Yoma la hare honona de agatu utahan a ralmu .
I know how to be humbled , and I also know how to abound . In any and all circumstances I have learned the secret both to be filled and to be hungry , both to abound and to be in need . ||| La'pa alier oleka la kleha-lara onde alier la re ' a-tniaru a ' g edon awuaror nohora hare . La ' hare honona de a ralmu nahepru .
I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me . ||| Yoma Kristus Nhi ' aruria a ' u pede atiutulu-ukwar nana hari honona .
However you did well that you shared in my affliction . ||| Mere miy di de , mhima-mrie ' a lia ler maka aliernana kropna-krieutu . La'pa hya ' maka ha mhi ' oleka re de ha samomuoga re .
You yourselves also know , you Philippians , that in the beginning of the Good News , when I departed from Macedonia , no assembly shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving but you only . ||| Ina-nara , ama-hyali makpesiay la Pilipi , miy hononmi ! Miy miat niohor oleka la lerni la , awuaran la ' Makedonia , de la ' ler maka na'nama a'ukot nohor oleka Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni de tiy miy . La ' ler de miy mieh ' a er mak kparan pia mrie'ela mhima-mrie ' a a ' u pa mi'enyatu kupna totpena a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni .
For even in Thessalonica you sent once and again to my need . ||| Ne la ' ler maka adiella Tesalonik meman nek de , mak alier la lehka-lara , de mi'enyatg oleka patuini-paro'onni re'eni ida-wor mueman mai a ' u .
Not that I seek for the gift , but I seek for the fruit that increases to your account . ||| A ' g edon ukot emkade totpena awuak pa mrie'ela miala patuini-paro'onni mai a ' u , mere totpena Uplerlawna Nala pripanni-fa'anni tiy miy yoma mtiulan olek la a wua .
But I have all things and abound . I am filled , having received from Epaphroditus the things that came from you , a sweet-smelling fragrance , an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice to God . ||| Aliernan oleka narehi-nalawan walia ntutul tutawnu , yoma miy enyatmi mai a ' u , de aliernan oleka la Epafroditus . Pa dodo'ondi de aliernan oleka pripanni-fa'anni . Hya ' maka miy miala mai a ' u re de , emekneka prehena-mau maka huwnu mikarni la ' Uplerlawna pa Nreiniana-na'nana .
My God will supply every need of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus . ||| Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu maka guhulia idamni-riama lia'arni dudanni ntutul tutawnu lele'namni , hota Nal tiy miy pia Narehi-nalawna la miy klehemi-larmi , onnila Kristus Yesus Nmat lia it hononit rerieini .
Now to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever ! Amen . ||| La ' hade pede ta'uli-tawedi tlilili-tmamuawua Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu makla ' Am la it hononita . E ' ed mak itkola tieru-tawur nehla la . Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi tlilili-tmamuau E ' a pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
Greet every saint in Christ Jesus . The brothers who are with me greet you . ||| Mikot la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak kor oleka Kristus Yesus kla ' ihru ida re honona , miwra awuak a kalwie'du . Ne inmi-narmi makden wut lia mai a lia ' handi rwak walia kalwiedni la miy hononmi .
All the saints greet you , especially those who are of Caesar 's household . ||| La ' walia riy honona makden la let di uhunu-ewatni mak kla ' oleka Uplerlawna mutnu , reriehenu wal lia mak kar lia Kaisar ray romni .
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you all . Amen . ||| Ampak pa Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nala ra'ani-pallu tiy miy . Amin Plola . Paulus agora Timotius ampak kalwieda tiy miy hononmi , Paulus
Paul , an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God , and Timothy our brother , to the saints and faithful brothers in Christ at Colossae , Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu makden Kolose mak kor oleka Kristus Yesus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida me makden rer lia E lirni-tunnu . A ' di de , Paulus maka Kristus Nhopan pa nodia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni , yoma Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nran a ' u la ' a E wniaror wamueheni . Agor wutga ita hyalli Timotius ampak de Uplerlawna , it Amlawanni de pena E ' ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy .
We give thanks to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , praying always for you , having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love which you have toward all the saints , ||| Amatlin olek la miy die mpiesiay oleka Kristus Yesus me miatu mtiulla-msiaynia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona . La ' hade pede nhi'inde la'pa amsumbain tiy miy , de ama'uli-mawedia Uplerlawna , Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Amni de , la ' a miy rerieimi .
because of the hope which is laid up for you in the heavens , of which you heard before in the word of the truth of the Good News ||| Miy e mpiesiay oleka , me miy e mtiulla-msiaynia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re yoma mhia'ara aranmi la yamori-yalewna maka Uplerlawna Nhi'targ oleka la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Rakot nohor oleka yamori-yalewan de tiy miy lia ' ler maka mitlin nohor walia Uplerlawna wniatutnu mak kaplollola , de Kot Kalwiedni de .
which has come to you , even as it is in all the world and is bearing fruit and growing , as it does in you also , since the day you heard and knew the grace of God in truth , ||| Kot Kalwied de mana ha nwewr olek la noha-rai di tetema . Ne la ' ler maka ha mitlin nana Kot Kalwied de me mnia'erit nana plollola Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni tiy miy , de mpiesiaya me nhiolmi-lietmi mana ndella plol wawannu . Emkade walia la ' meni-meni to ' a , de Kot Kalwiedni di nodia rimormiori la nhioli-lieta ilu-wniehwa kalwiedweda , me maka kpesiay mana na'ititar rer lia liawanni .
even as you learned from Epaphras our beloved fellow servant , who is a faithful servant of Christ on your behalf , ||| Kot Kalwied de ed maka Epafras , kniarwial miamni mak kden rer lia a ralam mamni , ha nakot tiy miy . E ' ed mak kdenrer pia ntulan mai ita yoma nora ami mkar wiut lia Kristus kniarni , la ' miy rerieimi .
who also declared to us your love in the Spirit . ||| Ne Epafras de mana ed mak kakot nohora mai am lia ' emkameni la Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak kodi plolli la miy pede miy die idma ntulla-nsayni ida .
For this cause , we also , since the day we heard this , do n't cease praying and making requests for you , that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding , ||| La ' hade pede la ' ler maka amatlin nohora miy pesiaymi de pa la'pa ntut lia dodo'ondi memna , amken rer miy lia sniumbain mamni ralamni . Nhi'inde ampak la Uplerlawna totpena mliernan kirkira-ralma-riora , wniarora-wnialai samomuou mak kwatiawua E Nhiw Lululli totpa miat niohor memna Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
that you may walk worthily of the Lord , to please him in all respects , bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the knowledge of God , ||| La ' emkade de hota mormiormi e rlernohor oleka Itmatromlawanni ralma-riorni , me la ' hya'-hya ' to'owa de miy mhi ' mamainia mak klola E ihranu-ralamni pa hota nhiolmi-lietmi ilmi-wniehwami honona re , rden la plollol wawannu . Me miy o'ta-kriahlu miy re yeher to ' pa naphyar wia pede miat niohor memna Uplerlawna .
strengthened with all power , according to the might of his glory , for all endurance and perseverance with joy , ||| Me ampak de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kodi plolli mak kdella tutullu-lolo'oni Narur nian miy totpena mlier la kropna-krieutu mana yana mpiadura mere miatu mhiur niohor ralam mehrani me miatu miodia ralma hepuepru .
giving thanks to the Father , who made us fit to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light , ||| Me totpa miatu mi'uli-miwedia it Amlawanni . Yoma E ' ed maka khima-kran miy pia mliernana hare honona maka Uplerlawna Nhi'targ oleka la ' a E mutnu-rahanu pa rlernana la E lodna-hairni la hititni-repreparni .
who delivered us out of the power of darkness , and translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of his love , ||| E ' ed mak kahal doinia melmelli-kalkalamni tnioranni mai ita pa Nken it la lelerni la A'nani maka E ' orgahani Nsayn de , lodna-hairni .
in whom we have our redemption , the forgiveness of our sins . ||| Yoma E A'nani Ntuwu-nhai it pa Nwe'er doin olek it la wutwutu-kokgohu , pede dodo'ondi de it do'oni-halli re ramou-rawitn oleka wa .
He is the image of the invisible God , the firstborn of all creation . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , itat niohor memna Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni , nhiolli-lietni , illu-wniehwani , kennama ita edon tamkek nan E ' a , yoma riy ramkek memna Uplerlawna nhiolli-lietni de la ' a Yesus Kristus de mormiorni-dardiarni la ' nohkeran di . Yesus de Wutmueha-Laimieha inhatta mak kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu ! Edonna rhi ' temn E ' la ' a maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayapi , mere E ' ed olek la wa .
For by him all things were created in the heavens and on the earth , visible things and invisible things , whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers . All things have been created through him and for him . ||| Yoma E ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nhopan pa Nakoki-nayapia haneknek wawannu makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha nora nohkeran di wawannu , de hya ' a-hya ' a mak kayamkeka me mak edon kayamkek taru mak kodi plolli la noh di utnu-liannu . Noha lyanti ha nkadkaduw nan di Yesus Kristus Nakoki-nayap niana totpena Yesus Kristus de Nlernan ya'uli-yawedi la ' a ir honona mormiorni-dardiarni .
He is before all things , and in him all things are held together . ||| Hare honona edonna rho ' a-rwanin ma'ta de , Yesus Kristus de ed mak kden ulu , me la'pa Uplerlawna Na'ohi-na'ar hare honona pa nhorwua de Yesus ed maka Ntorna-nrautu hare honona .
He is the head of the body , the assembly , who is the beginning , the firstborn from the dead , that in all things he might have the preeminence . ||| Me E ' de rna'etga la o'ta ne mutnu-rahanu de inonni tetema . Yoma E ' ed maka Uplerlawna Namori-nalewn ulga la ' a matmiati ralamni , totpena E ' ed mak kala ' ul pua nodi plolli la haneknek wawannu .
For all the fullness was pleased to dwell in him , ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a ralma-riorni totpena Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni , yarurni-yalaini , yamorni-yadarni , nhiolli-lietni , illu-wniehwani la'pa hare honona de , ed maka etla E A'nani Yesus Kristus .
and through him to reconcile all things to himself by him , whether things on the earth or things in the heavens , having made peace through the blood of his cross . ||| Uplerlawna Net tiarg olek pa Nal A'nani de totpena makden la nohkerna wawannu honona me la ' walia makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha rkalwied owa'an la Uplerlawna . Ne Uplerlawna Nhi ' hade de lola A'nani rarni mak khuria la'pa Nmati lia auwlakra hananni onnila it rerieini .
You , being in past times alienated and enemies in your mind in your evil deeds , ||| Mere miy die , ululu de miy olietmi la Uplerlawna pa miy mhi ' Uplerlawna la arwalmi , onnila ralma-riormi nden rer lia yatyata ralamni pa mhi ' a-myap niohora .
yet now he has reconciled in the body of his flesh through death , to present you holy and without defect and blameless before him , ||| Mere la ' lera-mela ri de la A'nani matmiatni , pede Uplerlawna Nhi ' a pamuli-payala tiy miy , totpa miy mior owa'ana E ' pa mkialwieda , totpena hota la'pa mliernan polpuolu la E gaini ralamni , de ta'en niana raklaka miy , yoma mikleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti .
if it is so that you continue in the faith , grounded and steadfast , and not moved away from the hope of the Good News which you heard , which was proclaimed in all creation under heaven , of which I , Paul , was made a servant . ||| Mere miy erammi . Mdien rer lia pesiaymi de , me mtiutrieri pitpit niohora . Mhia'ar toto ' memna aranmi la yamori-yalewna maka ha rakot nohora la Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni . Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni maka ha mitlin de , ha rakot nohor oleka pa nwewar la nohmarna uhunu-ewatni-lahwani . Ne la ' Paulus a ' muana awuali olek la mak khima-kre ' la Orgahi-Orha ' a tulanni-kniarni pa a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwied de .
Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake , and fill up on my part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body 's sake , which is the assembly , ||| Dodo'ondi de a ralmu nahepru onnila alier la kropna-krieutu la ' a miy rerieimi . La ' a a ino'nu mehrani-maunu , de u'itar wutga hya ' ed maka Yesus Kristus Namehra-namau niohora la ' a makpesiay re , de aliernan kropna-krieutu mak Uplerlawna Nror targ oleka wa . Ne makpesiay re wokni-le'enu de emeka E inon wamueheni .
of which I was made a servant according to the stewardship of God which was given me toward you to fulfill the word of God , ||| La ' Uplerlawna nhiopanni , pede a ' die ghi ' a hopopna la ' a makpesiay re wokni-le'enu pa a'ukot nohora tiy miy lira honona mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna ,
the mystery which has been hidden for ages and generations . But now it has been revealed to his saints , ||| de lira maka anni-anni me wenu-wolla ululu Uplerlawna Nawunum targa la ' a riy honona . Mere la ' dodo'ondi de rakot nohora la E mutnu-rahanu .
to whom God was pleased to make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles , which is Christ in you , the hope of glory . ||| Maka Uplerlawna Niwra Nakota-nalde'eta , de Yahudi atia ' mana hota rlernana Uplerlawna kalwiedni-paitiotni , ra'ani-pallu , pripanni-fa'anni mak samomuou memna . Uplerlawna ralma-riorni maka ululu de ha rawunum targa mere dodo'ondi rakot nohor de emkadi , de Yahudi atia ' miy miana , Yesus Kristus etla miy ihrami ralamni , pede miat muemn oleka de hota miora Uplerlawna la ' a geni miaka khitita-kreprepra .
We proclaim him , admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom , that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus , ||| Yesus Kristus ed maka amakot nohora la rimormiori honona . Ampagahniorta ir de amala wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kodia kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou . A ralma-rior mamni de totpena rimormiori id mana yana nden hala , mere honona rde ratlin la a wniatutu-wniaye ' mamni pa hota rakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti la Uplerlawna yamkekni yoma rora Yesus Kristus rla ' lir ida .
for which I also labor , striving according to his working , which works in me mightily . ||| La ' hade pede a ' muana wualunni-wualeran toto ' meman la a knia'ru de agal toto ' memna a ih'ru-ralmu kirkira-ralma-rio'ru maka Yesus Kristus Nal de , me E rurni-laini mak kari tioto ' meman la a ralmu .
For I desire to have you know how greatly I struggle for you and for those at Laodicea , and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , a ' g e giwra totpa miat niohora la emkameni la awualeran toto ' meman la a knia'ru la miy rerieimi , me la ' walia makden la Laodikia rerieini me la ' walia riy rahu mak edon kat niohor ma't a ' u , rerieini .
that their hearts may be comforted , they being knit together in love , and gaining all riches of the full assurance of understanding , that they may know the mystery of God , both of the Father and of Christ , ||| Awualeran toto ' memna la miy hononmi rerieini de totpena aghi ' arur niana miy ihrami-ralammi , me totpena idma nara ' a-napalg ida pede miy mlia ' wutg ida . La ' hade totpena ralma-riormi naphyari pia miat niohor memna Yesus Kristus E orgahani maka ululu de Uplerlawna edon Nakot nohora ma'ta .
in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna kirkira-ralma-riorni , lira-yatnu , me wniarorni-wnialaini maka kayade ' a la ululu geni de itat niohora onnila itora Yesus Kristus tla ' ida .
Now I say this that no one may delude you with persuasiveness of speech . ||| A'ukot nohora hari totpena yan memmemna mpialer la pesiaymi , yoma nur mi'na muaka kodi miy lia ohpa-lahara .
For though I am absent in the flesh , yet I am with you in the spirit , rejoicing and seeing your order , and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ . ||| Yoma la'pa a ' oliet a lia tiy miy miana , agat niohora de a ' g e dien rer lia miy onni . Ne a ralmu nahepru yoma mhi ' a-myapi die lol talanni , me mirur olek la pesiay la Yesus Kristus .
As therefore you received Christ Jesus the Lord , walk in him , ||| La ' hare honona pede ina-nara ama-hyali a'ukot hadi tiy miy , miy e mliernan oleka Kristus Yesus emekwalima miy matrommi , pede hota emkade wal pia mliernohora E ' a pa miy mmiori-mdiar lia plol wawna pa emeka riy mak kor olek Yesus rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida de rhi ' nana .
rooted and built up in him and established in the faith , even as you were taught , abounding in it in thanksgiving . ||| Miga'ar temn olek la E ' a , pede hota yeher to ' pa mpialiewna totpena pesiaymi la Yesus Kristus la ' ga ' a me pesiaymi narur lia wniatutu-wniaye ' a maka ha rwatut tiarg oleka tiy miy die . Ne ihrami ralamni mana rahepur nohor la pa mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna .
Be careful that you do n't let anyone rob you through his philosophy and vain deceit , after the tradition of men , after the elemental spirits of the world , and not after Christ . ||| Erammi la temmi ! Yanpa riy doma rawilu-rawewla miy pia mlier la klieratni . Lira-tunu re hare edonna rwatiawua Yesus Kristus . Mere ha rwatiawua rimormiori nohkerna ralma-riorni maka rwahaur nohor neka rimormiori deullu-tatarni mak edon kaplola me rakleha kuna .
For in him all the fullness of the Deity dwells bodily , ||| Yana mliernohora lira-tunu mak edon kaplola re yoma la ' a Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni , rurni-laini , la'pa yehwani-liakatni honona erla Yesus Kristus nhiolli-lietni .
and in him you are made full , who is the head of all principality and power . ||| Ne la ' walia miora Yesus Kristus ralm id wa , pede miy miana mliernan olek walia ruri-lai , lira-yatu , kirkira-ralma-riora samomuou . Yesus Kristus ed maka kodi plolli la hare honona mak kodi plolli-ktaryatnu la nohkeran di utnu-liannu .
In him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands , in the putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh , in the circumcision of Christ , ||| Ne , la ' walia miora Yesus Kristus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida pede emolmolan nekama rsunat olek miy wia . Sunat maka rimormiori limni enni atia ' hade , mere maka Yesus Kristus orgahi Nhi ' a la'pa Enolin doinia miy lia nhioli-liet yatyata-halala maka ululu de kodi plolli tiy miy .
having been buried with him in baptism , in which you were also raised with him through faith in the working of God , who raised him from the dead . ||| Yoma la ' a lerni maka ha rharan miy die emekwalima e rhuwur wutg olek miy lia Yesus Kristus . Ne la ' a nhiaran die wal pia , miy miana mliernohor walia Yesus Kristus de pa mmiori owa'ana , yoma miy e mpiesiaya Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni rurni-laini . Ne Uplerlawna ed mak kamori-kalewna Yesus Kristus la matmiatni ralamni .
You were dead through your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh . He made you alive together with him , having forgiven us all our trespasses , ||| Ululu de mmiormiori mere emeka mmiati olekwa yoma la ' a do'omi-halmi re . La ' ler de Yesus Kristus edon Nolin doin ma'ta miy lia nhioli-liet yatyata-halala mak ululu de kodi plolli tiy miy , pede emolmolan neka edon rsunat ma'ta miy . Dewade emeknekama Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna miy die la ' ler maka Enamori-nalewn olek Yesus la matmiatni ralamni . Ne Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna do'omi-halmi re honona .
wiping out the handwriting in ordinances which was against us . He has taken it out of the way , nailing it to the cross . ||| Emkade pede Uplerlawna Nwun dioinia agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni nora plolli-mneheni . Yoma emolmolan nekama Enhap doin olek it nanni la horta otna-ara mak klaklak ita onnila it do'oni-halli . Yoma emolmolan nekama horat mak kaklak ita , de ha rtapal wutga la auwlakra hananni de pede Nhayamoga yaklaka re honona mai ita .
Having stripped the principalities and the powers , he made a show of them openly , triumphing over them in it . ||| La ' a auwlakar de , Uplerlawna Natowar nana makodi plolli , mak ktorna-krautu la nohkerna utnu-liannu totpa riy honona ramkek memna Uplerlawna Nal olek ir la yawa .
Let no one therefore judge you in eating or drinking , or with respect to a feast day or a new moon or a Sabbath day , ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyal miy re , yana mitlin la mak kwaghal miy yoma mi'ina-miemnu ya'ana-yemnu maka ha rlarna onde la ' walia yoma miy edon mihepur nohora lera-mela maka lerlalawna la agama yatotni-yarieini , emeka lerlalawan wolla warwuaru onde la ' walia Sabat lerni , de ler maka Yahudi edon rkar lia .
which are a shadow of the things to come , but the body is Christ 's . ||| Yoma hare honona de emeknekama memannu tatar to ' a la ' a Yesus Kristus inhatte mak hota kmai nodia E kalwiedni-paitiotni me pripanni-fa'anni .
Let no one rob you of your prize by self-abasement and worshiping of the angels , dwelling in the things which he has not seen , vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind , ||| Pede yana mitlin la mak kwaghal miy onnila miy edon mliernohora ira wniehwani maka rtot pa rtutga nhioli mak klol yawa , me rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat . Yanpa mitlin la riy mak edon kaplola re , de miy edon mliernan siewa maka Uplerlawna Nala . Yoma riy mak edon kaplola re rtot pa rakot nohora toto ' a hya ' ed maka ha rdarat nana pa ratulu-rapetan la mormiorni mere tulu-petan nwatiawua nohkerna wniarorni-wnialaini to ' a .
and not holding firmly to the Head , from whom all the body , being supplied and knit together through the joints and ligaments , grows with God 's growth . ||| Riy mak emkare de edonna rlernohora Yesus Kristus wniatutnu . Mere Yesus ed makhi ' o'ta la E mutu-rahu wamueheni . Yoma Yesus tnioranni-riautnu de , makpesiay re rla ' wutga ihru ida-ralm ida totpena ir pesiayni re yeher to ' pa naruri-nalai pa rlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni . Ir emolmolan nekama inona ida maka limni-lakni irannu-matni rawok pa rwo'la-rlekur de rlernohora o'ta-kriahlu ralma-riorni .
If you died with Christ from the elemental spirits of the world , why , as though living in the world , do you subject yourselves to ordinances , ||| Ina-nara , mior oleka Yesus Kristus mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Ne la ' E matmiatni pa emeknekama miy miana mmiati olek wa totpena yana mpiaror nohora owa'ana nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini me deullu-tatarni . Pede ina-nara hya ' nrei piede miy e mhioli-mlieta pa emeka riy maka nohkeran di nodi plolli ma'ta la ? Nihya'pa miy mliernohora deulu-tatra mak emkadina de ,
Do n't handle , nor taste , nor touch ||| maka ha riwra , Yana mheik la hadi , yan mi'ina hade , yana mliok la hade ?
all of which perish with use , according to the precepts and doctrines of men ? ||| Deulu-tatra maka ha rwatutu-rwaye ' a re , rlernohora mamainia rimormiori ralma-riorni , maka rakot nohor to ' a hya ' maka edon nalo'on wali ne rhorwua , emeknekama ya'ana-yemnu maka la'pa ta'an doini-temun doin de nhorwua .
These things indeed appear like wisdom in self-imposed worship , humility , and severity to the body , but are n't of any value against the indulgence of the flesh . ||| La ' riy yamkekni de deulu-tatra mak emkade nodia kirkira-ralma-riora samomuou , yoma riy mak klernohora re rape'el la krei-iskola pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla rlernohora rimormiori wniarorni-wnialaini , me la'pa riy ramkek reria , de rtutga nhioli mak klol yawa , me rnahora-rnala ' a ir inon wamueheni . Mere deulu-tatra re rakleha ruri-lai pia rhi ' nan rimormiori pa rwali nhioratni me rolin nhioli-liet yatyatni mak ka'hira ralma-riorni la hya ' a-hya ' a to ' a .
If then you were raised together with Christ , seek the things that are above , where Christ is , seated on the right hand of God . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' dodo'ondi de , emolmolan nekama Uplerlawna Namori-nalewn olek mior rewre'wa Yesus Kristus la matmiati ralamni pede mliernan oleka mormiori warwuaru . Hade pede miatu mihak rer tio ' hya ' ed mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , la ' gen miaka Yesus Kristus Namtatan la Uplerlawna walli malganna pa Nor rewre'wa Uplerlawna rodi plolli .
Set your mind on the things that are above , not on the things that are on the earth . ||| Ralma-riormi nod rer lia hya ' mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha me yana nhioratmi nden rer lia nohkeran di yala'ani .
For you died , and your life is hidden with Christ in God . ||| Yoma mior rewre'wa Kristus mmiati olek pa miy edon mpiaror nan oleka nohkeran di gahani . Ne mior rewre'wa E ' mmiori owa'an totpa miora Uplerlawna mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Ne riy mak edon kpesiay re edon rna'erit nana miy mormiormi warwuarmi di .
When Christ , our life , is revealed , then you will also be revealed with him in glory . ||| Mormiormi onni-ga'arni de nwatiawua Yesus Kristus . Ne hota Nmai owa'an de Enhita-nrepra namrehi-namda'ara . La ' ler de mana hota miy mior E ' talan wali .
Put to death therefore your members which are on the earth , sexual immorality , uncleanness , depraved passion , evil desire , and covetousness , which is idolatry . ||| La ' emkade pede miolin doini hihi'imi-yapyapmi yatyatni-halalli mak kwatiawua it nhiolia rimormiorni . Yan memmemna milira-miliai , mireta-mihawa , me mhi ' nana nhiol yatyata mak ka'hira ralma-riora onde mipal niana nohkeran di ralma-riorni me hyonni-hyanni . Yoma itapal nian nohkeran di hyonni-hyanni de emekwalima it tru ' u-ttowr olek la uplera-upmati .
For these things ' sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience . ||| Yana mhi ' emkare , yoma do ' a-hala mak emkare er mak khi ' pa Uplerlawna nahankerna-ralmha'arni nha'ata la riy mak edon katlina-katailla E ' a .
You also once walked in those , when you lived in them , ||| Ululu de miy niek de miy ralammi nden rer lia nhiol mak emkade .
but now you must put them all away , anger , wrath , malice , slander , and shameful speaking out of your mouth . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei lia hare honona . Yana miwunu-miwenna , yanpa plet pa rarmi nha'ata , onde miaun targa . Yan memmemna mpiahoiti-mpiarenna onde idma nwohor weyata-ntatar weyata ida .
Do n't lie to one another , seeing that you have put off the old man with his doings , ||| Yana idma na'ohpa-nalahar ida , yoma mormior ululu rora nhiolmi lietmi-ilu wniehwami ululu re , misral oleka wa .
and have put on the new man , who is being renewed in knowledge after the image of his Creator , ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nhi ' miy pia dodo'ondi mpiali olek la rimormiori warwuaru . Ne hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' emkade pa nodi liarni totpa mliernohor reri E orgahani nhiolli lietni-illu wniehwani . Totpena la ' mormior warwuarmi di , de miat nohor memna Uplerlawna .
where there ca n't be Greek and Jew , circumcision and uncircumcision , barbarian , Scythian , bondservant , or free person , but Christ is all , and in all . ||| Pede la ' a miy mormior warwuarmi di , de mhioratdoin momuoga wniarora-wnialai maka rnaheri-rnahelta nniawera-nniapakia rira herni-gaini , de la ' a wniarora-wnialai la ' a Yahudi molla rora Yahudi atia ' a , riy maka rsunat oleka me maka edon rsunat ma'ta . La ' dodo'ondi de edonna rnawera oleka rira la mak kdella her li'iru-tat tio'ora , mak kpora-kdawra , mak marna-wuhura , ata-wa'ara . Rwaldioinia de hornama Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a neka ed maka kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu me E ' ed mak kden la makpesiay hononit ihranu ralamni .
Put on therefore , as God 's chosen ones , holy and beloved , a heart of compassion , kindness , lowliness , humility , and perseverance , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mpiali olek la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu maka Ha Nwalir niana pa mlia ' E gah wamueheni , maka Ensaynia . La ' hade pede mormiormi de idma sniayni ida , me idma nhi ' kalwied ida . Ne miy miana miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma , mtiutga ilu-wniehwa mnapla la ida .
bearing with one another , and forgiving each other , if any man has a complaint against any , even as Christ forgave you , so you also do . ||| Idma natu nhur niohora-npat niohora ida , yoma la ' riy ida nhoratdoin oleka , me miollia oleka ida do'oni-halli . Orgahi-Orha ' a Nhuria ralamni pa Enamou-nawitna miy lia do'omi-halmi , pede miy miana mhiur niohora-mpiat nohora mhioratdoinia rira do'oni-halli .
Above all these things , walk in love , which is the bond of perfection . ||| Onni-ga'arni meman de , idma natu nhi ' kalwied ida , yoma ralam kalwied de ed mak khi ' wutga miy pia mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida emek kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni .
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts , to which also you were called in one body , and be thankful . ||| Yesus Kristus ed mak khi ' itora it rimormior wialli pa tkalwieda . Pede dodo'ondi de mpialerna totpa idma nkalwied la ida . Yoma Uplerlawna Npolga miy pa mhi ' emkade , yoma emolmolan nekama miy mlia ' olek la inona ida . Ne mi'uli-miwed reria Uplerlawna .
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly , in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms , hymns , and spiritual songs , singing with grace in your heart to the Lord . ||| Mhioratreria Yesus Kristus lirni-tunnu me mliernohor reria yoma miatu mkien reri E lirni-tunnu la miy ihrami ralamni . Emkade pede idma natu nwatutg ida , me idma nano ' a-na'atg ida nnairia kirkira-ralma-rior samomuounu . Me miatu mpiatunu-mpiahniara pa mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna de miala tunu-nhiara krei-iskola pa idma nodi id pesiayni la ga ' a . Mpiatunu-mpiahniara de miodia ralma kalwieda terima kasi la Uplerlawna .
Whatever you do , in word or in deed , do all in the name of the Lord Jesus , giving thanks to God the Father through him . ||| La ' hya ' ed mak miltieri-mitiana onde mhi ' a-myapia de , mhi ' emeknekama mak kla ' nana Itmatromni Yesus Kristus ralamni , pa emolmolan nekama mak klernohor E ' a rhi ' nana . Me mhi ' hare de mi'uli-miwed reria Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu it Amlawanni de , lola Yesus Kristus .
Wives , be in subjection to your husbands , as is fitting in the Lord . ||| Ina-nara patke ' a miy , die miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma hapmi muanke ' a yoma nhioli-lieta inhatta olek hade wa la ' a riy mak kor olek Itmatromlawanni rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
Husbands , love your wives , and do n't be bitter against them . ||| Ama-hyali maka kmehlima olekwa . Miatu mtiulla-msiaynia hapmi . Yana mmiaklekal la .
Children , obey your parents in all things , for this pleases the Lord . ||| Upa-a'na , miatu mi'unni-mimta'ata mitlina-mitailla inmi-ammi la hya'-hya ' to'owa yoma hade de ed mak kla ' nana Orgahi-Orha ' a ralamni .
Fathers , do n't provoke your children , so that they wo n't be discouraged . ||| Ama miy miana , yana mmiaklekal la a'nami rpa ir ralam ramehra yoma hota ralma-riora worworga pa kirkirni-ralma-riorni edon ramtemna .
Servants , obey in all things those who are your masters according to the flesh , not just when they are looking , as men pleasers , but in singleness of heart , fearing God . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kla ' a hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara , miatu mitlina-mitailla upmi-matrommi la ' nohkeran di wawannu la ' a hya'-hya ' to'owa . Yana mtiot pa mimta'ata yoma e ratiak reri miy . Yana mtiot ya'ulmi la ira . Mere mi'unni-mimta'ata de mial ihru ploi-ralma ple'era yoma miy e miatu mhiu'ru-mhielm olek la Itmatromlawanni .
And whatever you do , work heartily , as for the Lord and not for men , ||| Kniari hya ' to ' maka upmi-matrommi nala tiy miy die , yana hermi-gaimi rpetna , mere mtiulla-mkiar die miala ihru ploi-ralma ple'era me mhima-mrie ' a emeknekama miy edon mhima-mrie ' a rimormiori mere Itmatromlawanni .
knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the inheritance , for you serve the Lord Christ . ||| Mhi ' emkare de onnila miat niohor oleka de hota miy mliernana miy kaimi la Itmatromlawanni maka Nhi'targ oleka pa emeka wniahlani , yoma plollolli de Itmatromni Yesus Kristus ed maka miy e mhima-mrie ' a .
But he who does wrong will receive again for the wrong that he has done , and there is no partiality . ||| Ne la'pa riy maka khi ' a hala , de riy de orgahi ed mak ktutulu-kakwara hade yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a edonna Nkei-nhelta rira herni-gaini .
Masters , give to your servants that which is just and equal , knowing that you also have a Master in heaven . ||| Ina-ama makla ' a upa-matroma la ' hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara re , mhi ' samomuou lia atmi-wa'armi re . Mhioratreria ! Miy miana emekwalia hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ar la Uplerlawna la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Continue steadfastly in prayer , watching in it with thanksgiving , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yan mininmi la sniumbaini . Mere mi'ererma . Me miatu msiumbain de mi'uli-miwed reria Uplerlawna .
praying together for us also , that God may open to us a door for the word , to speak the mystery of Christ , for which I am also in bonds , ||| Msiumbain rer wali ami totpena Uplerlawna Nal am pia amakot nohora lira-tunu mak kodia lir yawunum la ' a Yesus Kristus yala'ani maka ululu de Uplerlawna edon Nakot nohora ma'ta . La ' hade pede dodo'ondi de e rkeni a lia roma nhio'la ralamni .
that I may reveal it as I ought to speak . ||| Msiumbain reri mai a ' u totpena Uplerlawna Nala lirni-tunnu mai a ' u pa a'ukot nohora Yesus Kristus yala'ani de rira rna'erit nana , yoma hade ed mak kla ' nan Uplerlawna ralamni .
Walk in wisdom toward those who are outside , redeeming the time . ||| La'pa mior wutga riy maka edonna kpesiay de , miala yehwami-liakatmi , ltiermi-tianmi , me kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou ma mtiutga hya ' ed mak kaplol la ira . Mhioratreria , totpena la'pa mior mak edon kpesiay re , de mniairia ler de pa mtiutga nhiolmi-lietmi mak kaplola onde mikot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
Let your speech always be with grace , seasoned with salt , that you may know how you ought to answer each one . ||| Ne la'pa miltier die , mhiu'ru-mhielma me mniairia lira mak kla ' nan ir ralamni . La ' talan emkade pede miat niohor la emkameni la mpiahla nana hya'-hya ' maka ratiana tiy miy la ' a miy pesiaymi de .
All my affairs will be made known to you by Tychicus , the beloved brother , faithful servant , and fellow bondservant in the Lord . ||| Tikhikus , de a hyal miamni mak kden rer lia ralam mamni , hota nodi kota-nal de'eta tiy miy la ' a hare honona maka aliernan oleka la ' handi . Endenrer lia setia nhima-nre ' a la a kniar mamni la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a .
I am sending him to you for this very purpose , that he may know your circumstances and comfort your hearts , ||| Hya ' mak karei pia aghopan pa ntiy die totpena miat niohor ami emkameni la ' handi , ne totpena miy miana ralammi yana nmawla .
together with Onesimus , the faithful and beloved brother , who is one of you . They will make known to you everything that is going on here . ||| Hota Onisimus nor Tikhikus talan pa rtiy hande . Onisimus de emekwali miy pia mpiatiawua leta ida . E ' de it hyalli maka tsaynia me mak itpesiaya yoma nhiolli-lietni samoga . Enor Tikhikus hota er mak kakot nohora hya'-hya ' maka amhi ' nana re honona la ' handi .
Aristarchus , my fellow prisoner , greets you , and Mark the cousin of Barnabas concerning whom you received instructions , if he comes to you , receive him , ||| Aristarkus makden rewre'wa la mai a lia roma nhio'la ralamni , nwak kalwieda tiy miy . Emkade walia Markus , Barnabas garni de yoma rrora upni ida . Miy e mliernan horat mak a'ukot nohor Markus de tiy miy . La'pa hota entiy miy die , miy mpiatrom nan e ' la kalwiedni .
and Jesus who is called Justus . These are my only fellow workers for God 's Kingdom who are of the circumcision , men who have been a comfort to me . ||| Me Yesus maka nanni walia Yustus e na'enyat wualia kalwieda tiy miy . Enekneka ir wotelu rmeh ' a , maka kwatiawua makden Yahudi re , pa ror a ' pua mala ' nohora a kniar mamni la Uplerlawna . Ir er mak ktulan mai a ' u pede a ralmu nahepru . A kniar miamni de totpena riy ratlina-ratailla Uplerlawna pa emeka ir Rayni .
Epaphras , who is one of you , a servant of Christ , salutes you , always striving for you in his prayers , that you may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God . ||| Epafras na'enyat wualia kalwiedni tiy miy . E ' mana emekwali miy pa mpiatiawua leta ida . Enkar wial lia Kristus Yesus tulanni-kniarni . Nhi'inde nsumbain mamain tiy miy . Nwak rer mamain la Uplerlawna totpena pesiaymi naruri-na'orta me totpena miat niohor memna Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu nnia'eratni , me hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna ralamni Nala .
For I testify about him that he has great zeal for you , and for those in Laodicea , and for those in Hierapolis . ||| Amueh ' a nek de umkek memna la e nkar tioto ' meman pa nodia miy miora makden la leta Laodikia , me leta Hierapolis pesiaymi la ' a ga ' a .
Luke the beloved physician and Demas greet you . ||| Dokter Lukas maka itsayn de , me Demas e ra'enyat wuali kalwiedni tiy miy .
Greet the brothers who are in Laodicea , with Nymphas and the assembly that is in his house . ||| Mtiulan pa mikot walia a kalwied mamni la ' it inni-narni amni-hyalli makpesiay , makden la leta Laodikia me la ' walia it narni Nimpa , me la krei mutnu mak khi ' a krei lia Nimpa romni nayanni .
When this letter has been read among you , cause it to be read also in the assembly of the Laodiceans , and that you also read the letter from Laodicea . ||| La'pa mpiaik ahorga horat di la krei mutnu gaini ralamni la leta Kolose , demade mial walia horat di la ' a makdena Laodikia rpaikia la krei mutnu makden la Laodikia totpena honona ratlin nan walia . La'pa emkade walia miy miakden la Kolose mpiaik walia horat maka a'uenyat oleka la krei mutnu la Laodikia .
Tell Archippus , Take heed to the ministry which you have received in the Lord , that you fulfill it . ||| Me mikot la Arkhipus pa nhi ' ahorga e kniarni maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala yoma nora Orgahi rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
I , Paul , write this greeting with my own hand . Remember my chains . Grace be with you . Amen . ||| A ' u Paulus wuaka kalwieda-paitiot tiy miy , ne amueh ' a neka ed mak ktulsi kalwied di . Yana mhiortaplinga de a ' g ed ma'ta la roma nhio'la ralamni . Awuak de Orgahi-Orha ' a Nala ra'ani-pallu nanaloi-nanatar nan miy . A kalwied mamni , Paulus
Paul , Silvanus , and Timothy , to the assembly of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ , Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| A ' di , Paulus . Aghorta horat di tiy miy ina-nara ama-hyali la ' a krei mutnu makden la Tesalonika , mak kler olek la Uplerlawna makla ' Am la it hononita , me Itmatromi Yesus Kristus mutnu-rahanu . La a wotel am di de Paulus , Silas , me Timotius , ampak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de Nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwieda-paitiota tiy miy .
We always give thanks to God for all of you , mentioning you in our prayers , remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love and perseverance of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ , before our God and Father . ||| Amhoratreria emkameni pa mkiari lia Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni yoma mpiesiay E ' a , ne ralammi kalwiedni , pede mhi ' nhiurliwtu-wnialodaw la tniulan la riy . La ' walia mtiutulu-mikwara yamuki-yama'ala , yoma mhia'ara toto ' miy aranmi la Itmatromni Yesus Kristus , yoma hota Nawali pia Nmai pa Nalewna miy . La ' hade pede ina-nara la'pa amsumbain la Uplerlawna , de nhi'inde amakot nohora wniehwami-liakatmi re , pa ama'uli-mawed reri Uplerlawna , makla ' am la it hononita , onnila miy hononmi wniehwami-liakatmi re .
We know , brothers loved by God , that you are chosen , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak Uplerlawna ralamni Napal niana ! Amatga de Uplerlawna Naliri-nalioh nan oleka miy pa mlier la E ' a .
and that our Good News came to you not in word only , but also in power , and in the Holy Spirit and with much assurance . You know what kind of men we showed ourselves to be among you for your sake . ||| Yoma la'pa amakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni , de ami edonna mparla a yatu wamueh ' mamni mere Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la a wawan mamni , pede nur mamni nkerna la plol wawna . Hade pede amat muemna de Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni Nkar lia miy ihrami ralamni . Ne miy miana miat wualia de la ' lera amden wut tiy miy a hihi ' a-yapyap mamni wniatutu-wniaye ' mamni onnila miy rerieimi .
You became imitators of us and of the Lord , having received the word in much affliction , with joy of the Holy Spirit , ||| Amatga de Uplerlawna Naliri-nalioh nan miy , yoma la ' ler maka itto'or doin la de , maka mlier olek la nununi-wawuaunu , de wniehwami-liakatmi re rlernohora agora Itmatromlawanni wniehwa-liakat mamni la ' ler maka amlernana yamuki-yama'ala . Wniehwami-liakatmi re rlernohora wniehwa-liakat mamni , yoma la ' lera mliernan yamuki-yama'ala , onnila amodi Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni la ' tiy miy , ho'mana Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la miy , pede miodia niniha-malmiali ma mrieiniana-mia'nana .
so that you became an example to all who believe in Macedonia and in Achaia . ||| La ' a hade pede miy emolmolla nhior lawra nora ahwa lioda contoh la ' a riy maka kpesiaya Yesus , la ' a Makedonia me Akhaya liewnu .
For from you the word of the Lord has been declared , not only in Macedonia and Achaia , but also in every place your faith toward God has gone out , so that we need not to say anything . ||| Yoma onnila mikot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni , pede Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni nwewar la Makedonia me Akhaya ne hade edonna nmeh ' a , mere hya ' a maka ha mpiesiaya la Uplerlawna de nwewar la noha kperanni pede ami edonna makot nohora owa'an la ' ira .
For they themselves report concerning us what kind of a reception we had from you , and how you turned to God from idols to serve a living and true God , ||| Yoma riy liawanni rakot nohora miy lia ' lerni ha mrieinian am die pa makot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni . Rwahaur nohor la lera mtikil doinia atiehrami pa miwaldioin pa mlia ' hopopna-lili'iru la Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , de Uplerlawna inhatta hade , mak kodi plolli-mneheni .
and to wait for his Son from heaven , whom he raised from the dead , Jesus , who delivers us from the wrath to come . ||| Rakot nohor walia la ' a hota emkamenila mhia'ar aranmi la Uplerlawna Wutmueheni-Laimieheni Nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha de , de Yesus maka Uplerlawna Namoria la matmiatni ralamni . Yesus E ' inhatte , maka kamori-kalewn it la Uplerlawna ralam mehrani maka hota ntuin la noh marna .
For you yourselves know , brothers , our visit to you was n't in vain , ||| Ina nara-ama hyal miy re , miy mieh ' a miatga la ' a tniomra-nniah ' a mamni tiy miy die edonna nwalia la hamamuamua .
but having suffered before and been shamefully treated , as you know , at Philippi , we grew bold in our God to tell you the Good News of God in much conflict . ||| Hononmi miatga de la ' a lerni mak ami edonan mte ' ma'ta la Tesalonika , de amlernana yamuki-yama'ala la ' a Pilipi , me a tlin mamni npen lia yahe ' i-yamali . La'pa emkamenila mutlialawna rhi ' a oruli-augewat la ami , mere tniomra-nniah ' a mamni edonna nlol hamamuamua yoma ita Uplerlawanni Nal oleka iwarni pa ma mpadieh ' a , me ma mparan pia makot nohora E Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni tiy miy .
For our exhortation is not of error , nor of uncleanness , nor in deception . ||| Ina-nar miy re , la'pa amakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota , de ami edonna modia riy la talla palkiolatni , onde ami edonna modia kdiori-kdieha yoma ami edon mparora yatyatni-halalli .
But even as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the Good News , so we speak-not as pleasing men , but God , who tests our hearts . ||| Rwaldioinia la de , la ' am di de , Uplerlawna Nawerta-nataili olek ami , totpa Nat niohor memna a ihru mamni-ralam mamni . Nhior nioka Ntutmuata-nkewra ' olek am pia , pa makot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de . Pede hya ' to ' a maka amakota re de , nlola Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pede nhi ' amikria E ' ralamni . Ne ami edon modia lira wonikri-woliamni la riy . Mere Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka Nat niohora a ihru mamni-ralam mamni .
For neither were we at any time found using words of flattery , as you know , nor a cloak of covetousness God is witness , ||| Miat niohor walia de , ami edonna modia nur mi'na pa amlernana kupna-kai , onde ami edon mtiota-mpiudi riy . Uplerlawna e Nlin nohor-nmat nohor ami .
nor seeking glory from men neither from you nor from others , when we might have claimed authority as apostles of Christ . ||| Am miana edon mpaka ya'uli-yawed la riy nekneka wawannu , onde amteku miy pia mi'uli-miwedi ami yoma ami er makodia Yesus lirni-tunnu tiy miy .
But we were gentle among you , like a nursing mother cherishes her own children . ||| Mere amden wut tiy miy die , ampehwa-mlakat de emolmolla it inni ida e na'oka-nawehera a'nani de amodi lira mnapla .
Even so , affectionately longing for you , we were well pleased to impart to you not the Good News of God only , but also our own souls , because you had become very dear to us . ||| A sniayn mamni di tiy miy , nhi'nande amahepur pa ama makot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni tiy miy . Mere hade edonna nmeh ' a , mere la ' lera-ler to ' pa amtulan la ' miy , la tulla-kniari , kleha-lara , la'pa hya ' to'owa . Yoma a ralam mamni nmolu-nhelam nohor miy .
For you remember , brothers , our labor and travail , for working night and day , that we might not burden any of you , we preached to you the Good News of God . ||| Matiala ina-nara e mhioratrer mia'ta la ' ler maka amden wut miy pia amakot nohora Kot Kalwieda mak kwatiawu Uplerlawna tiy miy , de amkar lia lelera-melmela , totpena ma matu'utu ya'an mamni-yemun mamni , hewewat mamni-naniair mamni totpa yana miala hare honona mai ami .
You are witnesses with God how holy , righteously , and blamelessly we behaved ourselves toward you who believe . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kpesiay oleka talla yamori-yalewna , amatga la a inon mamni de mpehwa ploi-ple'er pa amakleha do ' a-hal la tiy miy . Maka ha rweta la do ' a-hala de am edonna mho'ola kotni-mhai lia memannu do ' a-hala de ami edon mheik la . Hononmi mlin reri-miat reri ami , la'pa Uplerlawna ora kniari mana matni reprepra-tlinni natnia'wa .
As you know , we exhorted , comforted , and implored every one of you , as a father does his own children , ||| Miat niohor olek walia , de mpahi ' a-mpayodia miy inon wamueheni , de emekneka ama ida e nwahi ' a-nwayodia a'na wamueheni .
to the end that you should walk worthily of God , who calls you into his own Kingdom and glory . ||| De am mala nnio ' a-niatu mak kodi miy lia ga ' a , me amdeh ' a miy lia plol wawna , totpena wniehwami-liakatmi re rla ' a Uplerlawna ralamni emek riy mak kla ' oleka Uplerlawna limni ralamni nhi ' nana-nyap niana . Yoma Uplerlawna Npolu miy pia Nhi ' miy lia kamieheni pa mrie'ela miwierat la Uplerlawna geni mak samomuou muemna mak Enodi plolli la emeka Ray .
For this cause we also thank God without ceasing that when you received from us the word of the message of God , you accepted it not as the word of men , but as it is in truth , God 's word , which also works in you who believe . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , id wali etla la ' hadi , de nod miamainia am lia ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna . De de la ' lerni la amakot nohora lir maka kwatiawu Uplerlawna tiy miy , de mimlieretniekla mrieiniana-mia'nana pa emolmolan nekama Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nakot nana . Ne plol toto ' pa lir de rimormiori nohkerna lirni atia ' a de , mere Uplerlawna lirni . Ne , onnila Uplerlawna lirni de , pede Uplerlawna e Nkar lia makpesiay Kristus miy ihrami-ralammi .
For you , brothers , became imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judea in Christ Jesus , for you also suffered the same things from your own countrymen , even as they did from the Jews ||| Ina-nara , amatga de mpiesiay oleka Uplerlawna lirni , yoma yamuki-yama'ala mak ha mliernana la ' ler maka mrieinana-mia'nana Uplerlawna lirni , de ita mutu kreiwialli makden la ' Yudea mak kler olek la Kristus Yesus de , mana rlernan olek walia emkade . Yoma rlernan kropna-krieutu la Yahudi mak edon kpesiay ma'ta . Emkade walia Tesalonika miy mliernana kropna-krieutu la makden Tesalonika mak edon kpesiay .
who killed both the Lord Jesus and their own prophets , and drove us out , and do n't please God , and are contrary to all men , ||| Yahudi mak edon kpesiay re er maka kwenna Itmatromni Yesus Nor makwohorulu-ktatrulu nabi . La ' ir wal pia rhokargot ami . Rhi ' riy honona la arwalli pa Uplerlawna mana edonna Ntelan nana-naut nana re .
forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they may be saved , to fill up their sins always . But wrath has come on them to the uttermost . ||| Yoma ir er maka kteri-ktaw ami , totpena yana amakot nohora Kot Kalwieda mak kodia yamori-yalewna la ' riy maka Yahudi atia ' a . Hota emkade mamain pa Yahudi re ra'ititar rer lia do'oni-halli , nhi'nande la'pa rhor wutga do'oni-halli re , de ntut mueman la ' liol genni . Ne la'pa la'awa dodo'ondi wa , de Uplerlawna ralam mehrani pede lodanni mana nweher nana liol genni me nwair doinia wniau genni rlernana Uplerlawna niukum lawanni .
But we , brothers , being bereaved of you for a short season in presence , not in heart , tried even harder to see your face with great desire , because we wanted to come to you-indeed , I , Paul , once and again-but Satan hindered us . ||| Ina nara-ama hyali , miy hononmi , la'pa emkameni pa riy rhi ' la ' a-rhi ' mai ita , totpa it idma olieta-patoga mai ida la ' a lera ho'ke'eni di , mere makaltieri riwra lyanti ntuini etia it yamkekni mere tah ' i lawna ed mak khaur reria noha-rai , am mhorat nan meman miy die , de amiwra plet pa amawali owa'an tiy miy . De amparor pa mtiy mtomar tiy miy ne a orgah ' u uhak meman talan pa atiy miy die mere hegana amlawanni nteri-ntaw ami .
For what is our hope , or joy , or crown of rejoicing ? Is n't it even you , before our Lord Jesus at his coming ? ||| Amiwa mtiy miy , yoma plollolli de miy er maka kwarana a aran mamni pa miod am lia ralam hepru . Yoma hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nmai tieman pa tora tapal wiutu , de miy di ed maka karur nian am lia tnikilgeni-nhia'argeni la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni .
For you are our glory and our joy . ||| Edonna nhal et miemna la ' miy pede a tnikilgen miamni naruri , me a nhia'algen miamni naplola . Miy miod am lia yamuki-yahepru lawna .
Therefore when we could n't stand it any longer , we thought it good to be left behind at Athens alone , ||| Ina-nara , yoma ayaherer mamni ndawar rer miamainia miy lia Tesalonika , de la'pa la'aw hohoni dewade , am ta'eni mtahan nana a ralam mayo ' mamni pede ametlia pa ameh ' a mparin tiar lia ' Atena ,
and sent Timothy , our brother and God 's servant in the Good News of Christ , to establish you and to comfort you concerning your faith , ||| ne ami e mhopan pa it hyalli Timotius ntiy miy die . Yoma Timotius di , e nkar wialia Uplerlawna kniarni pede amora mkar wiutu pa makot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a Kristus . Amhopna entiy die , totpena nhedu-ntehra miy pia mpiesiay reria Yesus Kristus .
that no one would be moved by these afflictions . For you know that we are appointed to this task . ||| La ' a emkade totpena la'pa riy id la miy miana edonna mpiadur la li'iru , onnila yamuki-yama'ala . Yoma orgahami miat wualia la ' a yamuki-yama'ala kropna-krieutu re , de Uplerlawna Nror targ oleka hadella mai ita .
For most certainly , when we were with you , we told you beforehand that we are to suffer affliction , even as it happened , and you know . ||| Plol toto ' de la ' a lerni la itden wutu , de nhi'inde amakot nohor oleka miwra hota itler la lui-nuhru , polpuol ina-wakwak ama , ne dodo'ondi orgahami mimkek toto ' memna de yala'ani de emekto ' a amakot oleka .
For this cause I also , when I could n't stand it any longer , sent that I might know your faith , for fear that by any means the tempter had tempted you , and our labor would have been in vain . ||| La ' hade pede , la'pa a ta'en niana utahan nana a ralmu , dewade amueh ' a neka ghopan doinia Timotius pa ntiy miy yoma a'umta'at pa yanpa mpiadur la li'iru la pesiaymi la Uplerlawna onnila ramuk-rama'al miy . Aghopna Timotius ntiy , yoma totpena agat muemna , la ' a emkamenila miy pesiayni la Yesus Kristus pa mlier la ga ' a . A ' g e umta'ata yanpa hegana amlawanni mak khi'inde nodi it la totota-wudwiudi ralamni , nkar lia miy ralammi pa mhi ' a de lol to'ama , pa a prehen mamni hamamuamua .
But Timothy has just now come to us from you , and brought us glad news of your faith and love , and that you have good memories of us always , longing to see us , even as we also long to see you . ||| Ne na'nam di Timotius nwatiawua miy die pa nmai owa'ana , pa nakot olek am pia la ' lira mak kla ' it ralamni , de emkamenila miy pesiaymi la ' Kristus yala'ani , ne miy idma yara ' a-yapalmi la ' rimormior wialmi . Enakot nohor walia la ' a nhi'inde miy ralma-riormi ndawar rer miamainia ami , yoma la ' a kalwied mamni tiy miy . Ne miy e miherer pa itwatrom pali , emekwalima am piali .
For this cause , brothers , we were comforted over you in all our distress and affliction through your faith . ||| La ' hade pede , ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , mitlina me mimkeka la ' ler di , de amler la kropanni-krieutnu la'pa polpuol ina-wakwak ama mere nwaldioinia de amamuki-mahepru . Yoma matlin nana miy kotmi , de miy pesiaymi la ' Yesus Kristus de , ed maka kod am lia ihru ploi-ralma ple'era mai ami .
For now we live , if you stand fast in the Lord . ||| Pede la'pa dodo'ondi de , hota a ralmu namtiertiernu hornama mtiutrier kdeded toto'ola Orgahi-Orha ' a .
For what thanksgiving can we give again to God for you , for all the joy with which we rejoice for your sakes before our God , ||| A kalwied mamni-paitiot mamni penpuenu-nanahala Uplerlawna yoma Uplerlawna kniarni la miy ihrami-ralammi nod miamainia am lia ralam hepuepru pa ma'uli-mawedia Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
night and day praying exceedingly that we may see your face and may perfect that which is lacking in your faith ? ||| La ' a lelera-melmel de amsumbain la ' E ' a pa ampak toto ' meman la totpena amlernana talan pa it idma nwatroma-ntahnei ida , totpena amhi ' aplola hya ' mak edon ntut ma'ta pa nhi ' arur miy lia pesiaymi la ' a Yesus Kristus .
Now may our God and Father himself , and our Lord Jesus Christ , direct our way to you . ||| Dodo'ondi ampakwak de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu Nmeh ' a neka , makla ' Ama la ' it hononita , me Itmatromni Yesus pa Nwalle'era talla mai ami totpena twatroma-ttahnei owa'ana .
May the Lord make you to increase and abound in love toward one another and toward all men , even as we also do toward you , ||| Me ampak rer lia Itmatromni pa Nhi ' miy pia idma nhilpai-nmanat ida , ne yeher to'ama nhiol kalwiedmi re mana mtiut walia la riy honona , pa emekwalia a nhiol mamni tiy miy .
to the end he may establish your hearts blameless in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints . ||| La ' nhiol kalwiedmi mak emkade , pede Itmatromni hota Nhi ' aruria miy ihrami-ralammi pa edonna mlier la do ' a-hala ralamni , pa la'pa hota la ' ler maka Itmatromni Yesus Nmai pia Nlidan nana-ntaur nana E hopopanni-lili'irnu nor wutga riy honona mak kla ' oleka E limni ralamni , de hota miy di de mikleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti la ' a Uplerlawna makla ' Am la it hononita gaini ralamni .
Finally then , brothers , we beg and exhort you in the Lord Jesus , that as you received from us how you ought to walk and to please God , that you abound more and more . ||| La ' a hare honona de ami e mal walia olek la ' miy wia ina-nara ama-hyal miy re la ' a loi-talla maka emkameni , totpena mormiormi-dardiarmi re rlernana Uplerlawna ralamni . Meman neka la mormiormi-dardiarmi ntutg olek hade wa . Mere hota dodo'ondi de , onnila itora Itmatromni Yesus tla ' ihru ida-ralm ida pede ampaka toto ' tiy miy pia yeher to ' a pa mlier la ga ' a , yana mpiadur la ' lir maka amakota re .
For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus . ||| Yoma miatg oleka loi-talan mak amakot oleka la ' miy wia , de amlernohora Itmatromni Yesus plolli-mneheni kuasa .
For this is the will of God , your sanctification , that you abstain from sexual immorality , ||| Uplerlawna ralma-riorni de emkadille , totpena E Nhi ' miy lia E kamieheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala . De olietmi la yalira-yaliai .
that each one of you know how to control his own body in sanctification and honor , ||| De totpa miy hononmi miat niohora pa yana mpiehwa hakomu-hakam lia heri-tio'ora pa milira-miliai . Mere milola-mila ' a , de miatu mi'unni-mimta'ata rira inni-narni , de totpa ilmi-wniehwami ndella plol wawna la ' patke'emi-muanke'emi re .
not in the passion of lust , even as the Gentiles who do n't know God , ||| Yana mhi ' a saworni-sawarna emekneka riy mak kaplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna pa nhi'inde ralira-raliai .
that no one should take advantage of and wrong a brother or sister in this matter , because the Lord is an avenger in all these things , as also we forewarned you and testified . ||| La ' a loi-talla maka emkade pa riy id mana yana saworni-sawarna inni-narni patke ' a rora muanke ' a makpesiay , onde nwaror yatyatni pa na nwotra inni-narni . Mitiak samomuou ! Yoma la ' ler ululu , de amakot oleka tiy miy wia de hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nukmua riy mak kalira-kaliai .
For God called us not for uncleanness , but in sanctification . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Npol it de , edonna Npol pua mai pia talira-taliai . Mere Enpol totpena Nhi ' it la E kamieheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala .
Therefore he who rejects this does n't reject man , but God , who has also given his Holy Spirit to you . ||| La ' hade pede riy meni mak kwanikli-kwayotlia wniatutu-wniaye ' di de , hade edonna nwayotlia wniarora rimormior wialli , mere e ' e nwayotlia Uplerlawna mak kal tiy miy , E Nhiw Lululli mak edonna kwotar la do ' a-hala ralamni .
But concerning brotherly love , you have no need that one write to you . For you yourselves are taught by God to love one another , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , hota ami edonna makot nohor la ' a horta ralamni , la ' a emkameni pa mpiehwa-mliakta kalwiedwed la ' a inmi-narmi maka it tor wutga pa pesiay ida . Yoma miy orgahami mliernan olek la Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni kuasa , pa idma nla ' a-nmai id la nhioli kalwieda-paitiota .
for indeed you do it toward all the brothers who are in all Macedonia . But we exhort you , brothers , that you abound more and more , ||| Ne plol toto ' a de nhioli-liet emkadi , de mtiutg oleka la it inni-narni honona makden la Makedonia . Mere ina-nar miy rooo ! Ampakwak de nhiolmi mak kalwieda-paitiot di , yeher to ' a pa ra'ititar rer lia .
and that you make it your ambition to lead a quiet life , and to do your own business , and to work with your own hands , even as we instructed you , ||| Mimtie'el nohora , ne mihmiakur la kniari pa mliernana ya'ana-yemnu . Ne yana mi'itra-milawan la rira lirni-tunnu mak kodia miy lia klieratni . Yoma amakot oleka tiy miy wia , de orgahami mtiulla-mkiari pia mi'ina-miemnu .
that you may walk properly toward those who are outside , and may have need of nothing . ||| La'pa mhi ' emkade de , hota miy edonna mhia'ara aranmi la riy meheni , ne reriehenu de riy mak edonna kpesiay Yesus Kristus hota ramkek tiy miy , de ratu rhu'ru-rhelma .
But we do n't want you to be ignorant , brothers , concerning those who have fallen asleep , so that you do n't grieve like the rest , who have no hope . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , amiwra makot la tiy miy totpena miat muemna de , la'pa makpesiay ida nmati olekwa de , yana miy ralammi nmayo ' a , emeka riy maka edon kpesiay Yesus ma'ta pa rakleha nhia'ar gen lia temni .
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again , even so God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in Jesus . ||| Yana ralammi nmayo ' emkade , yoma itpesiay oleka , la ' Yesus Nmati olekwa , noma Nmori owa'ana . La ' hade pede itpesiay walia onnila Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni de , pede hota Uplerlawna Namori owa'ana riy honona mak kpesiay , mak kmati olekwa , totpena rmori niohor Yesus .
For this we tell you by the word of the Lord , that we who are alive , who are left until the coming of the Lord , will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep . ||| La ' a makpesiay mak kmat die , hadi ed maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nmeh ' a Nwatutu-nwaye ' a , pede amiwra makot la tiy miy , de hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nmai , de hota makpesiay mak kmormior mia'ta la ' a ler de meman neka edonna nala ' ul pua nwadieh ' a genni .
For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout , with the voice of the archangel and with God 's trumpet . The dead in Christ will rise first , ||| Mere hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Nmeh ' a Nernu pa Nhopan doin makpesiay mak kmati olekwa pa ramori owa'ana , de hota Uplerlawna hopopna-lili'iru o'ta lawanni mana nhar lirni de nahmuakmuakru , ne Uplerlawna noknokni mana nalira totpena ra rpanulga . Pede riy makpesiay re mak kmati oleka re ramori plein ulga la matmiati ralamni .
then we who are alive , who are left , will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air . So we will be with the Lord forever . ||| Nhorwua de makpesiaya mak kmormior lia ler de hota ror rewre'wa pa itarian momuou lia darta-kakma ralamni totpena tora Orgahi-Orha ' a Itmatromlawanni twatrom la darat letgara , pa tor wutga Orgahi-Orha ' a tden wut pua nodi liarni .
Therefore comfort one another with these words . ||| La ' hade totpena miy idma nahepur nan ida ralamni de miala nnio ' a-niatu muaka amakota la ' a Yesus maimiaini ri la tiy miy .
But concerning the times and the seasons , brothers , you have no need that anything be written to you . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi makden la Tesalonika . La ' horta ralamni di ami edon makot nohora de hota moweni onde wenu-wolan meni pa hya ' maka amakota re rtutu-rte'ewa .
For you yourselves know well that the day of the Lord comes like a thief in the night . ||| Yoma hota miy mieh ' a miat olek walia la ' a plollolli de , hota Itmatromni de Nmai emolmolan nekama mak kwuri-kgalmu mak kamnelu-kamna ' a la mela letargara .
For when they are saying , Peace and safety , then sudden destruction will come on them , like birth pains on a pregnant woman . Then they will in no way escape . ||| La ' ler de riy riwra noha e namtie'te'ela yoma kokokna-rariarni , wunu-ara hadamonna la nohkerna wawannu . Mere la'pa nte'ela ler dewade plinu-plinnianamde rler la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani , ne la'pa riy id mana , emolmolla i'na maka edonna klewan la dari matni .
But you , brothers , are n't in darkness , that the day should overtake you like a thief . ||| Mere la ' a ler de pa Yesus Nmai owa'ana , hota makpesiay miy edonna mhiedu , yoma miy edonna mmiori-mdiar lia melmelli-kalkalamni pa mak kwuri-kgalmu nhi ' miy pia mhieduma .
You are all children of light and children of the day . We do n't belong to the night , nor to darkness , ||| Yoma miy hononmi de riy maka kmori-kdar lia noha lelerni . Rhor nan olek miy lia noha hititni-repreparni , it edonna tler wut lia riy maka kmor lia melmelli-kalkalamni , onde riy mak rhor wutga la riy mel'utni-malienni .
so then let 's not sleep , as the rest do , but let 's watch and be sober . ||| La ' hade pede it di yana tlernohora riy mak edon kpesiay mia'ta pa tmeh ' a tanin ita . Mere twerwer it matni ne ta'ereram la it temni ne tatu todi it inonni .
For those who sleep , sleep in the night , and those who are drunk are drunk in the night . ||| Yoma nhi'inde mela nahaya rira matni ne mak kemun nana mana rpehera-rma'wu .
But since we belong to the day , let 's be sober , putting on the breastplate of faith and love , and for a helmet , the hope of salvation . ||| Mere it di de , tla ' oleka noha lelerni mak kodia hititni-repreparni . La ' hade pede ta'ereram la it temni ne tatu todi it inonni . Emekneka mak ka'ara nnairi tera-ra'pa pa natiak inon wamueheni , itatiak it pesiayni de it hmuakarnu yana nwaler la ' Orgahi-Orha ' a , ne ittulla-tsaynia it rimormior wialli , me tsa'ar it aranni la Uplerlawna maka hota kamori-kalewna ita .
For God did n't appoint us to wrath , but to the obtaining of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ , ||| Hota itler la yamori-yalewna yoma Uplerlawna Nwalir ita de edonna ntot it la ' a niukmu , mere Nwalir it totpa itler la yamori-yalewna onnila Itmatromni Yesus Kristus .
who died for us , that , whether we wake or sleep , we should live together with him . ||| De Yesus Enmat die yoma it rerieini . Totpena la'pa hota Enmai , de la'pa itmati oleka me edonna , de itlernana mormiori pa tler wut lia E ' a .
Therefore exhort one another , and build each other up , even as you also do . ||| Hya ' maka a'ukota di naplola . La ' hade pede mhioratreria , mpiahu'ru ralma-riora , totpa mhi ' arur miatmiati hmuakarmi emekneka maka miy e mhi ' a oleka re .
But we beg you , brothers , to know those who labor among you , and are over you in the Lord and admonish you , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , ampak de mi'unni-mimta'ata riy mak kar tioto ' meman la ' Uplerlawna kniarni onnila miy rerieimi . Ir er mak kla ' ina-am tiy miy la'pa rano ' a-ra'atga miy onde rpolliohora miy pia rhi ' aruri miy pesiaymi .
and to respect and honor them in love for their work 's sake . Be at peace among yourselves . ||| Miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma , de miatu mtiutga ralam kalwiedmi la ' ira , yoma mhioratnana rkar lia Itmatromni kniarni ralamni . Yana mihuri-miwo'ora , mere mdiella mtiertierannu ralamni .
We exhort you , brothers , Admonish the disorderly , encourage the faint-hearted , support the weak , be patient toward all . ||| Ampak wal tiy miy totpena mpiolliohora riy maka kahmena kari . Mino ' a-mi'atga , mial lir la ' mak kamta'at lawna re . Mhima-mrie ' a mak kakleha ruri-lai , ne miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma la rimormiori wialmi la'pa rhi ' yatyatni la ' miy .
See that no one returns evil for evil to anyone , but always follow after that which is good for one another and for all . ||| Mitiak reria totpena yana idma nwahla id la yatyatni-halalli . Rwaldioin la de hota wniarormi nod rer lia wniehwa-liakta kalwieda-paitiota la ' a makpesiay me la'pa riy honona .
Always rejoice . ||| Miy mhiakur rer lia muki-hepru ,
Pray without ceasing . ||| ne mirur lia sniumbaini .
In everything give thanks , for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you . ||| La ' a hya ' a to ' a miodia ya'uli-yawedi la Uplerlawna yoma nhioli-lieta ilu-wniehwa emek hari , de er mak Uplerlawna Nahaka tiy miy , emekwalia riy maka kmori-kdar wut lia Kristus Yesus .
Do n't quench the Spirit . ||| Yana miodi plolli la Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli ,
Do n't despise prophecies . ||| de yana mpuar nana hya ' a maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nhopan pa riy rakota .
Test all things , and hold firmly that which is good . ||| Rwaldioin la de nnio ' a-niatu honona miwierta pleinia la ralammi , ne la'pa kalwieda de mliernohora .
Abstain from every form of evil . ||| Mihaldoini inonmi la ' a nnio ' a-niatu mak kodi miy lia yatyatni-halalli honona .
May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely . May your whole spirit , soul , and body be preserved blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Dodo'ondi ampak de Uplerlawna mak kala kalwiedni-paitiotni , Nmeh ' a neka na Nhi ' miy pia mlia ' a riy maka toto ' meman pa kla ' E kamieheni . De de ampak la Uplerlawna pa Nlin reri-nmat rer miy la ' ihrami-ralammi ulatmi-temmi , totpa yana mhieik la do ' a-hala pa la ntutu-nte ' meman la ' ler maka hota Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'ana .
He who calls you is faithful , who will also do it . ||| Uplerlawna ed mak kpolg oleka miy wia , totpa mhi ' E kamieheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala , ne plollol de hota Enhi ' nana yoma hya ' ed maka Enakot targa hota plol toto ' pa Nhi ' a .
Brothers , pray for us . ||| Msiumbain reri ami , ina-nara ama-hyal miy re .
Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss . ||| Mpiatroma-mtiahnei die idma nhar lirni la ida , mpiapahar lima , mpiare'et mat la ida emeka mpia'ina-mpianar la ' a wutu ida-lai ida kristen .
I solemnly command you by the Lord that this letter be read to all the holy brothers . ||| La ' a Itmatromni Yesus plolli-mneheni kuasa pede awuak de , totpena mpiaikia horat di la ' a ina-nara ama-hyali mak kpesiay oleka E ' a .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you . Amen . ||| Mpak de Orgahi-Orha ' a Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus , Nala ra'ani-pallu nlernohor reri miy . A kalwied mamni , Paulusa , Silas , Timotius
Paul , Silvanus , and Timothy , to the assembly of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ , ||| A ' di Paulus , aghorta di tiy miy , ina-nara ama-hyali la ' a krei mutnu makden la Tesalonika . Miy miak kla ' oleka Uplerlawna , makla ' Am la it hononita , me Itmatromni Yesus Kristus mutnu-rahanu . La ' am di de Paulusa , Silas , me Timotius ,
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| ampak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de Nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy .
We are bound to always give thanks to God for you , brothers , even as it is appropriate , because your faith grows exceedingly , and the love of each and every one of you toward one another abounds , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , ama'uli-mawedia Uplerlawna , onnila miy pesiaymi . Ne meman neka la a kniar miamni de ha yala'ani de emkade . Yoma miy pesiaymi di yeher to ' pa narur lia Yesus Kristus , ne nhi ' wal pia miy rur wial lia nhiolia kalwieda-paitiot la ' idma ntulla-nsayni ida .
so that we ourselves boast about you in the assemblies of God for your perseverance and faith in all your persecutions and in the afflictions which you endure . ||| Miy kalwiedmi emkade pede nhi'inde amla mtomra-mnah ' a la Uplerlawna kreini mutnu , de ameh ' a neka mpahaur nohor mamain miy lia ira . Amahepur nande amakot nohor miy pesiaymi la ' a Yesus Kristus , la'pa mlier wal lia kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a nodia pa la ' dodo'ondi , mere la ' hare honona de miy edonna mpiadura .
This is an obvious sign of the righteous judgment of God , to the end that you may be counted worthy of God 's Kingdom , for which you also suffer . ||| Mlier la kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a , mere miy edon mpiadura , pa nmeh ' a namemieheiya , de hota la'pa Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni , de Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni de naplola , edon nhala . Pa hota Uplerlawna Netlia de , miy er maka Uplerlawna Ntutga pa mlier la gen miaka Uplerlawna Nodi plolli emeka Ray pa nodi liarni . Yoma dodo'ondi mlier olek la liwtu-odwa lui-nuhru , yoma Uplerlawna Nodi plolli mai miy lia nohkeran di .
For it is a righteous thing with God to repay affliction to those who afflict you , ||| Hya ' a maka Uplerlawna Netlia la'pa Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni , de naplol memna . Hota naplola pa Nwahla riy maka knutin-kdahla miy , de nhiolli-lietni .
and to give relief to you who are afflicted with us when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire , ||| Ne la'pa miy lia dodo'ondi , de mlier la kropanni-krieutnu emekwalia ami . Pena Uplerlawna ed mak kakerna it liwatnu-odawni la ' a ler maka hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nwatiawu Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Nmai . Hota Nmai die tamkeka ai maka nlomlomra la lyanti , de Enor rewre'wa E hopopanni-lili'irnu mak karuri-kalai pa rerun la nohkerna-rai marna wawannu .
punishing those who do n't know God , and to those who do n't obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus , ||| Enerun de totpena Nukmua riy mak edonna kwarei-kwadana Uplerlawna , mak edonna kwehwa-klakta pa rlernohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota maka rakot nohora Yesus Itmatromlawanni .
who will pay the penalty , eternal destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might , ||| Riy mak emkare hota rlernana niukum matmiati-molmuolu mak kodi liarni , pa rreidioinia la Orgahi-Orha ' a herni-gaini , me hota Enolin limni la pede hota edon ramkeka Itmatromlawanni plolli-mneheni tutullu-lolo'oni .
when he comes in that day to be glorified in his saints and to be admired among all those who have believed , because our testimony to you was believed . ||| La ' hare honona de hota Enhi ' a la ' a lera Ha Nmai die , totpena Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi lilili-mamuawua onnila hya ' maka Ha Nhi ' nan oleka la ita mak kla ' E kamieheni , makpesiay E ' de rerieini . Hota miy wal pia mlier wut lia makpesiaya re , yoma mpiesiay oleka hya ' maka amakota tiy miy .
To this end we also pray always for you that our God may count you worthy of your calling , and fulfill every desire of goodness and work of faith with power , ||| Emkade pede nhi'inde amsumbain reri miy . Amsumbain totpena Uplerlawna maka tkola tieru-tawur nehla la de , Netlia de miy er maka mliernana hya ' maka Npol miy pia mliernana . Ampak la Uplerlawna totpa wniarormi-wnialaimi kalwieda-paitiota , me nhioli-lieta honona maka miy pesiaymi nodi miy lia de , Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni nodi miy totpa hota mhi ' nana-myap niana .
that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you , and you in him , according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Amsumbain emkade totpena hota Itmatromlawanni Yesus Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi onnila miy , me totpa Yesus mana Nran miy nanmi la ' heyanna yoma ita Uplerlawanni Nora Yesus Kristus ralam kalwiedni tiy miy .
Now , brothers , concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together to him , we ask you ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus maimiaini ne la ' walia it tor E ' a tawok wut pua tden la geni ida , hadi ed maka awuak pa mhioratreria .
not to be quickly shaken in your mind or troubled , either by spirit or by word or by letter as if from us , saying that the day of Christ has already come . ||| Yan memmeman neka mimta'at pa mhiakomu-mhiakam niohora rira rodia lira riwra Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus maimiaini ntutu-nte'ewa . Matiala mak kodia kota-de'eta de riwra lir de nhapar rer lia hya ' maka amror targa , onde a wniatut muamni-wniaye ' mamni , onde riwra de naplol wali , yoma ami e mhorat walia hadella a horat mamni ida .
Let no one deceive you in any way . For it will not be unless the rebellion comes first , and the man of sin is revealed , the son of destruction . ||| La'pa emkameni ho'mana , yan memmemna mitlin la rira lira kdiorni . Yoma la'pa edonna nla ' ma'ta la ler maka Yesus Nmai pa nma nte'ewa de hota riy rahu rhoitio'ora-rtahnei lia Yesus Kristus , ne rimormior yatyata amlawanni mak kmalawna Uplerlawna , mak hota kler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni , hota npehela ga ' a pa Uplerlawna Nhur niohora pa riy yatyat de ntutga rupni .
He opposes and exalts himself against all that is called God or that is worshiped , so that he sits as God in the temple of God , setting himself up as God . ||| Nodia po'onni pa hota natulu-napetna inonni la ' a geni-tien maka rimormiori rsumbain la , onde la ' a hya ' a maka rimormiori rkola tieru-rawur nehla la de . La ' pa na'ala genni la Uplerlawna roma kreini nayanni me nakot nohora niwra e ' de de Uplerlawn e ' a .
Do n't you remember that when I was still with you , I told you these things ? ||| Matiala mhioratreria la ' hare honona re de , a'ukot nohor olek harella tiy miy wia la ' a ler maka itden wut die toh ? !
Now you know what is restraining him , to the end that he may be revealed in his own season . ||| Ne dodo'ondi miatg oleka la ' a hya ' ma'ta mak karuri-kalai mak kla ' oruli-augewat la riy yatyat de maimiaini , totpa la'pa ntutu-nte ' walia ler maka Uplerlawna Net tiarg oleka pa hota rimormior yatyata amlawanni de ntut walia rupni .
For the mystery of lawlessness already works . Only there is one who restrains now , until he is taken out of the way . ||| De hegana amlawanni maka khi ' a riy pa rmalawna Uplerlawna de e nwewlona la kniarni mere edon nayamkeka , ne edonna nhewar ma'ta . Yoma mak khi ' oruli-augewat la yatyatni-halalli de nhi ' emkade pa nodi liarni la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Netlia .
Then the lawless one will be revealed , whom the Lord will kill with the breath of his mouth and destroy by the manifestation of his coming , ||| Nanpena riy yatyat de nayamkeka . La'pa Itmatromlawanni Yesus Nte'ewa de , hota E ' ed maka kharlirni pa Nalernia riy yatyata amlawanni de la yawa me Nala preheni-mkaini mak khita-krepra na Nwunu-nwenna la gaini ralamni .
even he whose coming is according to the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders , ||| Mere la'pa Itmatromni Yesus edon Nmai mia'ta de , riy yatyat de hota nhar niohora ruri-lai plola-mneh lawna maka hegana amlawanni ha nala . Hota enhi ' neka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona , mak ktutga rurni-laini , totpa riy ema rtaplelleltarga . Mak ha nhi ' nana honona re penpuenu-nanahala putra-palka .
and with all deception of wickedness for those who are being lost , because they did n't receive the love of the truth , that they might be saved . ||| Riy maka plollol pa hota rlernana matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa , de hota riy yatyat de , e nnairia pudi-akla yatyata hya ' to ' a , pa na ntot memna ir la klieratni . Honona re hota rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni , yoma rwanikli-rwayotlia Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot mak kwatiawu Uplerlawna pa na namori-nalewna ira .
Because of this , God sends them a powerful delusion , that they should believe a lie , ||| La ' hade pede Uplerlawna Naltarg ir la klierat lawanni , pede ir mana rpesiay pudi-akla ohpa-lahara re .
that they all might be judged who did n't believe the truth , but had pleasure in unrighteousness . ||| Totpa riy honona maka ralamni na'aw niana do ' a-hala me edonna kpesiay la ' a hya ' a ed mak kaplola , de hota rler la niukum matmiati-molmuolu .
But we are bound to always give thanks to God for you , brothers loved by the Lord , because God chose you from the beginning for salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief in the truth , ||| Ina nara-ama hyali maka Orgahi-Orha ' a ralamni nala , nhi'inde ama'uli-mawedia Uplerlawna onnila miy . Ne meman neka a sniumbain mamni yala'ani emkade . Yoma la mulaliaini de , Uplerlawna Nwalir nian miy pia hota Namori-nalewan miy . Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nhi ' a miy totpena mlier wut lia E mutnu mak kakleha do ' a-hala , ne la ' walia mpiesiaya Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kwatiawu plollola Uplerlawna . La ' talan emkade , pede mlier la yamori-yalewna .
to which he called you through our Good News , for the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Yamori-yalewan de ed mak kariei pia Uplerlawna Nala Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak amakot nohor de pa na Narieinian miy , yoma E ralma-riorni de totpena mrie ' wal pia mliernana ya'uli-yawedi emeka hya ' maka Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus hota Nlernana .
So then , brothers , stand firm and hold the traditions which you were taught by us , whether by word or by letter . ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi , mhioratreria totpena mtiutrier tertehra . De hya ' a maka ampatutg oleka la tiy miy wia , de amodia wniahauru , onde amkenia la horta ralamni mana , mtie'la rer pitpit lia hare honona .
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself , and God our Father , who loved us and gave us eternal comfort and good hope through grace , comfort your hearts and establish you in every good work and word . ||| Dodo'ondi ampak la Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a neka Nora Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu makla ' Am la it hononita pa Nahepur nan miy , ne Naruri-na'orat nan miy ralammi totpena mkiar pia mikot nohora hya'-hya ' to ' maka kalwieda-paitiota , ne nhioli-lieta kalwieda honona re hota mhi ' nana-myap niana . E ' ed maka Nsayni ita , ne la ' a E ralam kalwiedni , pede Enhi ' pa ita nhia'argenni naruri , me totpa it edonna twaler la it genni pa nodi liarni .
Finally , brothers , pray for us , that the word of the Lord may spread rapidly and be glorified , even as also with you , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa la'awa lira korkorni de , a'ukot tiy miy , msiumbain la mai ami , ina-nar miy re . Msiumbain de totpena lir mak kwatiawu Orgahi-Orha ' a de nwaleran pa nodi liarni la ' noha uhunu-ewatni , ne rimormiori riwnu-halli rreiniana-ra'nana emekwalima la ' lerni makden Tesalonika miy mrieiniana pa mpiesiaya .
and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men , for not all have faith . ||| Msiumbain wal lia Uplerlawna totpena Namori-nalewna am lia riy yatyata-halala . Msiumbain emkade yoma eneknek to ' a riy dom to ' a maka kreiniana-ka'nana lira-nnio ' a mak kwatiawu Orgahi-Orha ' a de pa rpesiaya .
But the Lord is faithful , who will establish you and guard you from the evil one . ||| Mere Orgahi-Orha ' a Ndenreri setia . E ' ed maka hota karuri-ka'orat nan miy me Nhopun rer miy lia hegana amlawanni .
We have confidence in the Lord concerning you , that you both do and will do the things we command . ||| Me a pesiay miamni npenpuenu tetema la Orgahi-Orha ' a la miy wawanmi . Ampesiaya de mliernohora oleka hya ' maka amakot tar tiy miy , ne hota yeher to ' pa mliernohora a lir mamni .
May the Lord direct your hearts into God 's love and into the perseverance of Christ . ||| Ampak de pena Itmatromni Nodia miy totpena miat niohora Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni tiy miy . Ne ampak wal pia Enhi ' aruri miy pesiaymi totpena la'pa mlier la nniahora-nniala ' a miy edon mpiadura , emekwali Yesus nhiolli la ' ler ululu .
Now we command you , brothers , in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , that you withdraw yourselves from every brother who walks in rebellion and not after the tradition which they received from us . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali makden la Tesalonika uhunu-riwni , la ' a Itmatromni Yesus Kristus plolli etla mai ami , pa dodo'ondi amhopan miy pia olietmi la inmi-narmi makpesiay maka inon werta la tulla-kniari pa edon nlernohora wniatutu-wniaye ' a maka amal olek la ira .
For you know how you ought to imitate us . For we did n't behave ourselves rebelliously among you , ||| Amhopan mhi ' emkade yoma mimkek olek ami la ler mak itden wut die . Ami edonna prei-pre'et am lia kniari . Hade pede miy orgahami miatga pa mliernohora talan mamni .
neither did we eat bread from anyone 's hand without paying for it , but in labor and travail worked night and day , that we might not burden any of you . ||| Ami edonna mpokwiok niekpa ma'an nana-memun nana rira ya'ana-yemannu mere lelera-melmel de amtepartarlia kniari werwerta , totpena yana amtot arukia hari tiy miy .
This was not because we do n't have the right , but to make ourselves an example to you , that you should imitate us . ||| Amkaria emkade , de yana mpiarora de ami e mamta'ata mpaka tniulan tiy miy . Mere amkar pia amtutga a talan mamni tiy miy pede hota mliernohora .
For even when we were with you , we commanded you this , If anyone is not willing to work , do n't let him eat . ||| Yoma la ' lerni maka itden wut mua'ta de am miana amala tit di tiy miy , de mak edonna kari de yana rre'ela na'ana .
For we hear of some who walk among you in rebellion , who do n't work at all , but are busybodies . ||| Amakot hari yoma ami e matlina de miy e mior walia riy prei-pre'eta mhiol wiutu . Ir edonna rtulla-rkaria hadomdoma , mere rwei niekpa rtar nur lia rira .
Now those who are that way , we command and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ , that they work with quietness and eat their own bread . ||| Yoma amora ir rewre'wa la pesiay ida pa amhopna ira ne amano ' targa re , totpena rkar die yana rahuri-rawo'ora , yana rod niuru , mere rtulla-rkar pia rwahaka ya'ana-yemun wamueheni .
But you , brothers , do n't be weary in doing what is right . ||| Ne la'pa ina-nara miy , yan memmemna mipre'et la nhioli-lieta mak kalwieda .
If any man does n't obey our word in this letter , note that man and have no company with him , to the end that he may be ashamed . ||| Yanpa hota riy dom la tiy miy die edonna rlernohora hya ' a mak amakota re la horta ralamni di . Mhioratreria riy mak emkare . Ne yana miora mpiatamputu totpena nmola-nma ' a .
Do n't count him as an enemy , but admonish him as a brother . ||| Mere yana mimola-mima ' a pa emeka arwalmi . Mere mino ' a-mi'atga de emekwalima miy narmi ida .
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times in all ways . The Lord be with you all . ||| Riy Orgahi-Orha ' a ed maka Nmeh ' a neka ktoran reria ita kalwiedni-paitiotni . Ampak de pena Enalnal reria E kalwiedni-paitiotni la ' a haneka-harah wuawannu . Ampak de Itmatromlawanni Orgahi-Orha ' a pena Nor wut miy hononmi talla .
I , Paul , write this greeting with my own hand , which is the sign in every letter . This is how I write . ||| A ' u Paulus wuaka kalwieda-paitiot tiy miy , ne amueh ' a neka tiulsi kalwied di emeka nhi'inde aghi ' a la horta-horta honona totpena ntutga de , a ' g ed maka ka'enyatu horat di . Mimkeka emkameni pa nhi'inde a nhiortu di .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all . Amen . ||| Ampak de Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nala ra'ani-pallu nlernohor reri miy hononmi . A kalwied mamni tiy miy , Paulusa , Silas , Timotius
Paul , an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the commandment of God our Savior and the Lord Jesus Christ our hope , to Timothy , my true child in faith , Grace , mercy , and peace from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord . ||| A ' di Paulus , mak kal horat di tiy o ' a a'nu Timotius . La ' a it pesiayni la Uplerlawna , de o ' emeka a a'na raralmu o ' a . Ama , Uplerlawna Makamori-Kalewna ita me Kristus Yesus mak itsa'ar it aranni la , ed maka Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a ' pua a lia makodia E lir kalwiedni . Awuakwak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de Nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus ralma kalwiedni pa Nala ra'ani-pallu me kalwieda-paitiota nanaloi-nanatar nan o ' a .
As I urged you when I was going into Macedonia , stay at Ephesus that you might command certain men not to teach a different doctrine , ||| Ama , awuak de omdien atehra la Epsus , emeka ukot olek tiy o ' a , la ' ler maka alia'awa Makedonia . Yoma la ' Epsus de riy ida worga e rwatutu-rwaye ' a riy la talan mak edon kaplola , pa awuak de , o ' ed mak kodi etia re .
and not to pay attention to myths and endless genealogies , which cause disputes rather than God 's stewardship , which is in faith . ||| Mukot la ira totpena hadewa la wniahaur nohora tuntunu , me di'na-lohora silsilah maka plalahwa . Yoma hare honona de hota rerieiniana yawenan lawna , ne hota edonna rhi ' aruria it pesiayni . Mere it pesiayni de ed mak kodia Uplerlawna kniarni la ' a ga ' a .
But the goal of this command is love from a pure heart , a good conscience , and sincere faith , ||| A yano ' u di nnia'eratni , totpena riy ralamni re ramou-rawitna , me ploloi-plele'era , me toto ' meman la ' pesiayni la Itmatromlawanni . Hota la ' a nhioli-lieta ilu-wniehwa kalwieda-paitiot emkadi , pa riy rhi ' samomuou lia rimormior wialli .
from which things some , having missed the mark , have turned away to vain talking , ||| Mere riy dom mana edonna rmori-rdar lia nhioli-lieta kalwieda-paitiot di , mere e raklierat olek la yawahla lira-tunu mak edon klol talla .
desiring to be teachers of the law , though they understand neither what they say nor about what they strongly affirm . ||| Ira rwarehelia la ' mak kwatutu-kwaye ' a Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni , mere kennama raltier die emeka riy mak nurnu kerna la plol wawannu , de plollolli de raplin niohora lira-tunu me deulu-tatra maka ir e rakot nohora oleka mai makpesiay ita .
But we know that the law is good if a person uses it lawfully , ||| Itat niohora de , la'pa rnairi deulu-tatra la riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala , de deulu-tatar de yala'ani de nodia kalwiedni mai rimormiori .
as knowing this , that law is not made for a righteous person , but for the lawless and insubordinate , for the ungodly and sinners , for the unholy and profane , for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers , for manslayers , ||| Yoma la ' deulu-tatra yala'ani , edonna rtot hade la rimormioria kalwiedweda , mere rhi ' hade la mak kmalawna , mak edon ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna , mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala , mak klernohor neka nohkerna wniarorni , mak kwunu-kwenna inni-amni , mak kwunu-kwenna haneknek wawannu ,
for the sexually immoral , for homosexuals , for slave-traders , for liars , for perjurers , and for any other thing contrary to the sound doctrine , ||| la ' mak kalira-kaliai , mak kwadu'ula , mak kamnelu-kamna ' a rimormiori , mak ka'ohpa-kalahara , mak kod niana riy mak khala , me la ' a he ' to ' pa maka khi ' a-kyapia hya ' a maka edonna kamnehela wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kaplola .
according to the Good News of the glory of the blessed God , which was committed to my trust . ||| Wniatut die , hade etla Kot Kalwieda ralamni mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna . Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a ' pua ukot nohora la ' a E Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni . Uplerlawna mak kdella tutullu-lolo'oni , ne maka ha ra'uli-rawedia .
I thank him who enabled me , Christ Jesus our Lord , because he counted me faithful , appointing me to service , ||| A ' u'uli-uwedia Itmatromni Kristus Yesus , maka kal ruri-lai mai a ' u pa akar lia E kniarni , yoma Enlina-nmat a ' die plola mai a lia kniarni di pede Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a ' u .
although I used to be a blasphemer , a persecutor , and insolent . However , I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly in unbelief . ||| Enamkek rer a lia ululu de a ' g ed maka upolu-uliella E nanni , ne a ' g ed maka umuki-uma'ala , nniahora-nniala ' E ' a . Mere Uplerlawna Ntutga ralam kalwiedni mai a ' u , yoma la ' ler de de , a ' g edonna puesiay mia'ta pede a ' g edonna gatga hya ' a maka aghi ' a-yapia .
The grace of our Lord abounded exceedingly with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus . ||| Ne reh wial die , Nala kalwieda-paitiota pripanni-fa'anni pa Nala Ntera-ndem a ' u pua aliernana ruri-lai pa apuesiaya , me agatu tiulla-siayni la a mutwua'lu . Ruri-lai die , Nal hadella it hononita mak kor oleka Kristus Yesus kla ' lir ida .
The saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance , that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners , of whom I am chief . ||| Hota itpesiay miemna lira mak a'ukota di yoma ha naplola , de Kristus Yesus , Ntopur la noha wawannu di totpa Namori-nalewna mak kler la do ' a-hala ralamni . Ne a ' wual pia riy maka khi ' do ' a-hala yatyat memna .
However , for this cause I obtained mercy , that in me first , Jesus Christ might display all his patience for an example of those who were going to believe in him for eternal life . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana Yesus Kristus de Ntutga ralam kalwiedni mai a ' u , totpa la talan emkade pede riy honona ramkek nana yehwa mnapalli memna mai a ' u maka takenia ukwar nana do ' u-ha'lu maka kaniutni-kamdierna . Totpa ratga de E ' wal pia Ntutga ralam kalwiedni la riy honona maka hota kpesiay E ' a totpena rlernana mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
Now to the King eternal , immortal , invisible , to God who alone is wise , be honor and glory forever and ever . Amen . ||| La ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , Ray maka edonna rwaliri nhierannu-wniaunu , mere mak kodi plolli pa nodi liarni , Uplerlawna mak kmormiori lia tulu-lyanti , maka riy ta'en niana ramkek nana , Uplerlawna inhatta hade . Mai pia itlilili-tmamuawua , ta'uli-tawedia lelera-melmela pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
I commit this instruction to you , my child Timothy , according to the prophecies which were given to you before , that by them you may wage the good warfare , ||| A'nu o ' a Timotius , hya ' maka a'ukot targa la horat di la tiy o ' a , de omhi ' a totpena emeka mliernohora Uplerlawna nnio'oni maka ha ror targa la krei mutnu ralamni la ' a o ' kniarmu la ' ler maka o'ta-mata krei rran limni la o wawanmu . Mua'ala nnio ' de pa mhi ' a la warehermu la Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni , totpa emeka mak ka'ara ida nnairia tera-ra'pa pa nala arwalli la yawa . Yoma nnio ' de emeka keliau mak katnioran la limmu malwiru , me halwa'armu maka mkiol reria la limmu malganna .
holding faith and a good conscience , which some having thrust away made a shipwreck concerning the faith , ||| Ne la Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni di de , mtie'la rer pitpit lia pesiaymu mak kaplollola , me ralammu mak kaploi-kaple'era pa emeka mtiamin taru ika me mhuapar reri yehemu pa mliop termu-mriun wehlamu . Mere hota la ' riy dom de , rhoitio'or doinia pesiayni me ralam ploloi-plele'era , pede pesiayni emeka hawnie'era .
of whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander , whom I delivered to Satan that they might be taught not to blaspheme . ||| La ' era re de , de rwet la Himeneus me Aleksander . Riy maroro ' a re de , agukmua oleka wa pa agotlia la hegana amlawanni , totpena Uplerlawna Nwatut irrora hadewa la yapolu-yaliella la E ' a .
I exhort therefore , first of all , that petitions , prayers , intercessions , and givings of thanks be made for all men , ||| La ' a li'ru di onni-ga'arni de totpa msiumbain la Uplerlawna , de mpiolu-mpiak nohora inon wamuehemi nora riy dom to ' a kleheni-larni , me mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna onnila E hihi'ini . Msiumbain nohora riy honona
for kings and all who are in high places , that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and reverence . ||| emeka ray-ray , me riy maka ktorna-ka ' a . Msiumbain emkade totpena it mormiorni di , nler la lina-lera , ne itmor niohora ralma ploi-ple'er la Uplerlawna , me riy id mana naploi-naple'er la rimormior wialli .
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior , ||| It sniumbaini emkade , ed maka kod rimormior it la kalwiedni . Ne hade nlola Uplerlawna mak kalewn ita , ralamni .
who desires all people to be saved and come to full knowledge of the truth . ||| Yoma Enwahak de , totpena riy honona rlernana mori-lewna me rat niohora hya ' mak kaplola .
For there is one God and one mediator between God and men , the man Christ Jesus , ||| Uplerlawna ida Nmeh ' a , ne mak khi ' taliorta-lakatrai klol letgara la ' a Uplerlawna Nora rimormior nohkerna de , ida Nmeh ' a wali , de Kristus Yesus . E ' de rimormiori id E ' a .
who gave himself as a ransom for all , the testimony at the proper time , ||| Enal inonni pa na Ntuwu-nhaiya riy honona la do ' a-hala ralamni . La ' hade wal pia , la ' ler maka Ha Nwarekna plollola , de Uplerlawna Ntutga de , Enala Yesus pa Nerun la nohkeran di totpa riy honona rler la mormiori-dardiari wawannu .
to which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle-I am telling the truth in Christ , not lying-a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth . ||| Me la ' a hade rerieini pa Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a ' u , pa a lia god kiota-gal de'eta Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni maka rakot nohora mormiori-lewlewan di , me totpa awuatutga la riy Yahudi atia ' a la ' pesiay mak kaplol di . Hya ' maka a'ukota ri de , de ha plollola re , me a ' g edonna ulahara .
I desire therefore that the men in every place pray , lifting up holy hands without anger and doubting . ||| Ama , awuak de totpena la ' meni-meni to ' pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla , de a'na muanke ' a rsumbaini , de rala ihru ploi-ralma ple'era , me yana rwarora-rwalaiya yawunu-yawenna la ralamni .
In the same way , that women also adorn themselves in decent clothing , with modesty and propriety , not with braided hair , gold , pearls , or expensive clothing , ||| A'ukota totpena a'na patke ' a rhewta-rnairia lawra-raini mak ktutga nhioli-lieta kalwiedweda . Yana rnairia lawra-raini mak ka'hira muanke ' a . Yana rtet mioratnu de edonna nlola pa'etnu-parahmani onde rnairia leli-maha , mutiara , onde hewta me naniair mak welli werta .
but with good works , which is appropriate for women professing godliness . ||| Kalwiedni de twaldioinia pa a'na patke ' a re nhiolli-lietni illu-wniehwani kalwiedweda , totpena la ' talan mak emkade pede riy rwarora de a'na patke ' a re samomuou yoma nor ira kreini-iskolli re ramneneha .
Let a woman learn in quietness with full submission . ||| La'pa mak kodi plolli pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni , nwatutu-nwaye ' a , de a'na patke ' a re rwatut lia mtie'ela , ne ratlina-rataili .
But I do n't permit a woman to teach , nor to exercise authority over a man , but to be in quietness . ||| A ' g edonna wuayow pa a'na patke ' a rwatutga a'na muanke ' a onde rodi plolli la hare , mere a'na patke ' a re ramolmuolga la wniatutu ralamni .
For Adam was formed first , then Eve . ||| Yoma maka Uplerlawna Nkokoma-npapala yanulu , de Adam ne la'pa hohoni noma Hawa ' a .
Adam was n't deceived , but the woman , being deceived , has fallen into disobedience , ||| Ne Hawa ' a nanpa ed maka ha rakal nana pede rtolkiaiya Uplerlawna riorni-liaini .
but she will be saved through her childbearing , if they continue in faith , love , and holiness with sobriety . ||| La'pa emkade ho'mana , hota a'na patke ' a rtor a'nani de rler la mormiori-lewlewna hornama pesiayni narur lia Yesus Kristus , ne natu ntutu reria nhioli-lieta kalwieda-paitiota la rimormior wialli , la ' walia la ' mormiorni de , hewewta-naniayarni me nhiolli-lietni rlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
This is a faithful saying , someone who seeks to be an overseer desires a good work . ||| La ' lir di de ha plollol memna pede mpiesiaya . De a'na muanke ' a ida mak kiwra kla ' a Penatu ' a Samasa , de riy de ralamni nodi olek la tulla-kniar miaka tulliawna-welwierta .
The overseer therefore must be without reproach , the husband of one wife , temperate , sensible , modest , hospitable , good at teaching , ||| A'na muanke ' a mak kla ' a Penatu ' a Samasa de , riy mak ta'en niana riy raklaka la hala , yoma nakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti . De nmehlim mana nor tutga patke ' a ida nmeh ' a , ne natu nodia inonni , natu nhioli-lieta totpena riy ratu rhu'ru-rhelma , natga niniha-malmiali la riy mak kanin tar lia romni , me natu nwatutu-nwaye ' a .
not a drinker , not violent , not greedy for money , but gentle , not quarrelsome , not covetous , ||| Yana twaliria muanke ' a mak kma'wu , onde muanke ' a mak kahuri-kawo'or lawna mere ta'ala riy mak khu'ru-khelma mak kodi lira mnapla , ne riy mak kor rimormior wialli rmori kalwiedweda , me riy maka ralamni edonna nden rer lia kupna-kai .
one who rules his own house well , having children in subjection with all reverence , ||| Ne natu na'ohma-nakatlia romni nayanni , me nwatutu-nwaye ' a'nani pa ratu ratlina-ratailla e ' a .
for how could someone who does n't know how to rule his own house take care of God 's assembly ? ||| Yoma muanke ' a mak kaplinu kna'ohma-knakat lia romni nayanni de , hota emkamenila nwatutga krei mutnu ? !
not a new convert , lest being puffed up he fall into the same condemnation as the devil . ||| Twaliria Penatu ' a Samasa de , yan ta'ala riy mak na'nama kler teman la pesiay la ' Yesus Kristus . Yanpa hota nwal lia riy mak katulu-kapetna , pede Uplerlawna Nukmua emeka Nukmu oleka hegana amlawanni la ulul genni onnila tullu-petanni .
Moreover he must have good testimony from those who are outside , to avoid falling into reproach and the snare of the devil . ||| Ra'ala riy maka riy honona ratu ra'unni-ramta'ata la ' a leta ralamni . Mak edon kpesiay mana hota ra'unni-ramta'at e ' a . Yoma la'pa edon emkade , de hota riy rapolu-raliella pa reiniande ntuin la hegana niaohmannu .
Servants , in the same way , must be reverent , not double-tongued , not addicted to much wine , not greedy for money , ||| Emkade walia mak khima-kre ' a re de riy mak ta'en niana riy raklaka la hala yoma riy kalwiedweda pede riy ratu rhu'ru-rhelma , ne ralma plele'era , me ralamni edon nden rer lia kupna-kai , me edonna ka'ana-kemnia tgo ' arka lawan rehia .
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience . ||| Rawur rer pitpit lia ihru ploi-ralma plele'era penpuenu tetema la ' a Uplerlawna wniatutnu-wniaye'eni maka ululu de riy raplin niohora , mere dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Ntut tiarga .
Let them also first be tested , then let them serve if they are blameless . ||| La ' hare honona de , rawerta-ratailia nhiolli-lietni re , pa la'pa rden la plol wawan de , nanpena ir rre ' pa rhima-rre'ela jema'ata ralamni .
Their wives in the same way must be reverent , not slanderers , temperate , and faithful in all things . ||| Hawni patke ' a mana tamkeka de riy maka samomuou , pede riy ratu rhu'ru-rhelma . Yana rla ' riy maka nhi'inde kod niuru onde riy mak kemun lawna arka , mere riy mak katu kodia inonni la haneknek wawannu totpa riy rpesiay ira .
Let servants be husbands of one wife , ruling their children and their own houses well . ||| Mak khima-kre'ela jema'ata re , de natu na'ohma-nakatlia romni nayanni , ne hawni patke ' a mana enekneka riy ida .
For those who have served well gain for themselves a good standing and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus . ||| Riy maka khima-kre ' a jema'ata la kalwiedwedni , de hota riy ra'unni-ramta'ata la kniarni ralamni , ne hota rparan pia rakot nohora pesiayni la Kristus Yesus .
These things I write to you , hoping to come to you shortly , ||| Agha'ara a ralma-rio'ru la Uplerlawna , de hota edon nalo'on wali ne Uplerlawna Nal talan pa ama tiomra-niah ' a tiy o ' a . La ' emkade ho'mana aghi ' horat di wal tiy o ' a , pa a'ukot nohor nhioli-lieta kalwiedweda .
but if I wait long , that you may know how men ought to behave themselves in God 's house , which is the assembly of the living God , the pillar and ground of the truth . ||| Totpena la'pa yanpa ukri'ita , de pena omuatga la emkamenila it yehwani la ' maiya Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu ita . Uplerlawna de ed mak kden pa Nodi liarni . Ne makpesiay it de , emolmolan nekama Uplerlawna romni . Yoma emolmolan nekama roma ida wniatatgeni , me riri tniutgeni-nhia'argeni nreiniande takenia rom de rawo'la nana , de makpesiay it hononita de er maka kod rieria Uplerlawna wniatutnu plollola totpa taken niana rawilu-rawalia la ' genni .
Without controversy , the mystery of godliness is great , God was revealed in the flesh , justified in the spirit , seen by angels , preached among the nations , believed on in the world , and received up in glory . ||| Ne riy id mana ta'en niana nwanikli-nwayotlia , de it agamni wniatutnu de mak samomuou muemna . Wniatutnu di ed maka riy raplin niohora pa la'awa lerni maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niande pa Nalharia . Wniatut di wal pia ed mak kodi it la mormiori-dardiari mak kla ' Uplerlawna ralamni , yoma rakot nohora Yesus de riwra , Entota inonni de emekneka rimormiori , ne Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mana Ntut wuali E plollolli . Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu mana rlina-rmat walia plolli-mneheni . Kotni de nwewar la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni pede rimormioria nohkerna wawannu rpesiaya , ne E ' de Narian pa Nla'awa Ilyamou-Watyatoha la ' a gen miaka khitita-reprepra .
But the Spirit says expressly that in later times some will fall away from the faith , paying attention to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons , ||| Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nalkota-nalde'eta matraralma , niwra hota la ' a ler hohoni de hota riy dom de rhoitio'or la Yesus wniatutnu mak kaplola , pa hota ratlina-ratailla hegana-kawnu yawirnu-yawewalli mak kodia klieratni , ne hota rlernohora wniatutu-wniaye ' a yatyatni-halalli de ,
through the hypocrisy of men who speak lies , branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron , ||| maka riy tukla-wahla , putra-palka ha rwahauru . Ralma-riorni re rko ' i nan oleka melmelli-kalkalamni .
forbidding marriage and commanding to abstain from foods which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth . ||| Rwatut riy pa yana rmehlima , ne yana ra'ana mak ir rahmena ra'ana . Mere yamanan de Uplerlawna ed mak khi ' nana , pa riy ra'ana . Ne makpesiay Yesus it mak kat niohora Uplerlawna wniatutu plollolli , de ta'uli-tawedia Uplerlawna nanpena ta'ana yamanan de .
For every creature of God is good , and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving . ||| Haneknek maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana re , de kalwied momuoga re , ne id mana edonna naliarna pa yana ra'ana . Mere la ' a hya ' a maka Uplerlawna Nala re , de hornama ta'uli-tawedia Uplerlawna nanpena tsoi lim pa ta'ala .
For it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nhar lirni pa Niwra yamanan de kalwieda , me yoma it sniumbaini , de nareinian de , yamanan de kalwied momuoga pa ta'ana .
If you instruct the brothers of these things , you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus , nourished in the words of the faith and of the good doctrine which you have followed . ||| La'pa ompuatutu-mpuaye ' a hya ' maka a'ukota ri la ' a inmu-narmu maka muor wutga la pesiay ida , de hota mlia ' riy mak kar samomuou lia Kristus Yesus kniarni ralamni , mak kamor rieria Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la o ' ihramu-ralammu me wniatutu-wniaye ' a plollola maka mliernohor oleka wa .
But refuse profane and old wives ' fables . Exercise yourself toward godliness . ||| Olie'tu la yatui-yawedi mak edon kperkuna pa hota rmalawan la Uplerlawna wniatutnu-wniaye'eni . Mere emolmolan neka mak kawlari ida , la lera-lera nwadieh ' a totpa inonni yeher to ' pa naprana , hota mpuadieh ' a totpa la ' a mormiormu ralamni nhiolmu-lietmu wniehwamu-liakatmu rlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
For bodily exercise has some value , but godliness has value in all things , having the promise of the life which is now and of that which is to come . ||| Yoma la'pa it inonni naprana , de nodi untu oke ' a mai ita , yoma inona prana nodia it la untu la ' tuw di mak itden ma't la nohkerkeran di . Mere la'pa itwadieh ' a totpa la ' it mormiorni ralamni de itlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , de hade ed mak kodi unut la hya'-hya ' to'owa , yoma hota nodia untu la nohkeran di , me la'pa la ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha wali .
This saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance . ||| Hota itpesiay miemna lira mak a'ukota di yoma ha naplola .
For to this end we both labor and suffer reproach , because we have set our trust in the living God , who is the Savior of all men , especially of those who believe . ||| Itat niohora de hota itlernan untu la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . La ' hade pede twadieh ' a la ga ' a , yoma itahnia'ar to'ola Uplerlawna mak kden la lyanti lawna E ' a . E ' ed mak kodi plolli pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori , la rimormiori mak kpesiay E ' a .
Command and teach these things . ||| Mpuatut momuoga la jema'ata re , ne mhuopan pa rlernohora .
Let no man despise your youth , but be an example to those who believe , in word , in your way of life , in love , in spirit , in faith , and in purity . ||| Yana muolin doinia riy id pa nparwah ' a nan o ' a , yoma hota la ' rira wniarorni de o ' ed ma'ta la nih wawahra-narun mermera lewatni . Mere rwaldioinia de o ' emekneka nhior lawra ni'ita ahwa lioda contoh la ' a riy maka kpesiay , de , la ' ltiermu-tianmu , wniehwamu-liakatmu , la ' a tulla-sniayanmu la mutwualmu , la ' momuoumu-witwitanmu , me la pesiaymu la Yesus .
Until I come , pay attention to reading , to exhortation , and to teaching . ||| A'utkot tiy o ' de mupe'el pa mpuaiki Puklawan de la mutlialawna gaini , me mukot nohor Puk de lirni . Ne muno ' a-mu'atga ir pa rler la ga ' a . Mhi'-mhi ' reria hare , pa la'awa lerni mak amuai olek de .
Do n't neglect the gift that is in you , which was given to you by prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the elders . ||| Yan inon wertu la mniairia ruri-lai maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nal tiy o ' a , ruri-lai miaka omliernana la ' lerni o'ta-mata jema'ata rran limni la o wawanmu , la ' ler mak ha ror targa Uplerlawna nnio'oni la o kniarmu .
Be diligent in these things . Give yourself wholly to them , that your progress may be revealed to all . ||| Mlia ' pa mliernohora a li'ru de , yana inon wertu mere mupe'el nohora re , totpena riy honona ramkek nohoru de mlier la ga ' a .
Pay attention to yourself and to your teaching . Continue in these things , for in doing this you will save both yourself and those who hear you . ||| Mutiak kalwiedweda nhiolmu-lietmu wniehwamu-liakatmu , me mutiak walia totpa wniatutmu nden nek la plol wawannu . La ' a hare honona de mdien reri , yoma la'pa omhi ' emkade , de hota emekwalima o ' inon wamuehemu , me la ' walia riy mak katlin tiy o ' mana o ' e mulewn oleka .
Do n't rebuke an older man , but exhort him as a father , the younger men as brothers , ||| La'pa mpuolliohora riy maka yanulga la o ' a , yana lirmu nmaklekal la . Ne mual lir la de emekneka o ' e muora ammu . Mhi ' a tuwari-laweru de emolmolla hyalmu .
the elder women as mothers , the younger as sisters , in all purity . ||| Me ina-nara pat yanulnulu de emekneka inmu , ne a'na gari pat hararara re de mhi ' a la emek garmu pa muatu mhu'ru-mhuelma re . Yana mpuehwa-mliakta nhioli-liet mak edon kaplol la ' ira .
Honor widows who are widows indeed . ||| Mhu'ru-mhuelma me mtiulla-mrie'ela patyata mak plollolli de napatyata .
But if any widow has children or grandchildren , let them learn first to show piety toward their own family and to repay their parents , for this is acceptable in the sight of God . ||| Mere la'pa patyata ida upni onde a'nani etla de , mual lir la totpena ratu rtulla-rkari , ragera-ra'ai pa ramkeka pleini ira romni mniotni kleheni-larni totpena ratu rwahla inni onde upni prehenni-maunu . La ' talan emkade , pede rtutga ir agamni de naplollola . Yoma wniehwa-liakta emkadi de hota nlola Uplerlawna ralamni
Now she who is a widow indeed and desolate , has her hope set on God and continues in petitions and prayers night and day . ||| Patyata maka inonni ktuin taru , pa na ' a'na riy napatyata , nakleha mak ktip gera-kwati au muati , ne nawniair to'ola lyanit marna . Lelera-melmel de polpuol inni-wakwak amni la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu maktera-makdema , kawilla-kayomtia dudnu tutul tiutwu-lele'nama .
But she who gives herself to pleasure is dead while she lives . ||| Mere patyata maka khi ' mamaini yatyatni-halalli mak ka'hira ralma riorni , de plollolli de ha nmati olekwa mere itamkeka de e nmormior mia'ta .
Also command these things , that they may be without reproach . ||| Ama , hota mual lir la patyata inni-narni re totpena ramkek la patyat de kleheni-larni , totpa riy ta'en niana raklak ir la hala , yoma ir mormiorni de rakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti .
But if anyone does n't provide for his own , and especially his own household , he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever . ||| Yoma la'pa riy ida nahmena ntera-nlahga inni-narni , reriehenu romni wamueheni mniotni , de nwayotlia it pesiayni . La'pa riy mak emkade yatni-halli nreh wialia mak edon kpesiay hindu-halaiki .
Let no one be enrolled as a widow under sixty years old , having been the wife of one man , ||| It twet wutga la patyata totpa hota ittulan la ira , de patyata maka tamkeka de edonna npa'eini-npahal la ' a hya ' a maka itakota ri , Rhorat wutga la patyata maka kmor nian la anni terampwonema me nmehlim nan toto ' ralamni .
being approved by good works , if she has brought up children , if she has been hospitable to strangers , if she has washed the saints ' feet , if she has relieved the afflicted , and if she has diligently followed every good work . ||| Ne itatga de e ' de pat maka kwehwa-klakta rimormiori wniehwani . Tamkeka de emolmolla ntera-nlah wua samomuou upni-a'nani olekwa , niniha-malmial niohora riy maka kmai pia kanin tar lia romni nayanni , nhoi-ntania riy makpesiay , nhima-nre ' a riy mak kakleha , ne nape'ela nhi ' haneka-harahu wuawannu mak kla ' riy ralamni .
But refuse younger widows , for when they have grown wanton against Christ , they desire to marry , ||| Yana mhiorat wutga patyata mak edon nhape ' ma'ta yoma hota rwaror nana hya ' mak ka'hira ralma-riorni , pa rahak owa'ana mehlimni pede rto'or la Yesus Kristus .
having condemnation , because they have rejected their first pledge . ||| Pa hota Uplerlawna Nukmua , yoma rhortapling oleka nnio ' a-niatu maka rakot targ olek la E ' a .
Besides , they also learn to be idle , going about from house to house . Not only idle , but also gossips and busybodies , saying things which they ought not . ||| La ' walia rahe ' miamain pa ranina-ramat la riy romni-lewnu . Ne yatyatni walia la ' a nhi'inde nurnu re rapran la yapupu-yaheri la rira , ne rwotra-rtal lia riy halli me rwahor ralma-rior la lira-tunu mak ira edonna ror la .
I desire therefore that the younger widows marry , bear children , rule the household , and give no occasion to the adversary for insulting . ||| La ' hade pede agiwra ramehlim owa'ana patyata mak edon nhape ' ma'ta totpena rlernana upa-a'na de , de ramkek la mehlimni kalwiedni-paitiotni pa totpa mak edon pesiay re edonna rlernana talan pa rahe ' i-ramali ita .
For already some have turned away after Satan . ||| Yoma patyata dom de e rler targ olek la hegana amlawanni liol genni .
If any man or woman who believes has widows , let them relieve them , and do n't let the assembly be burdened , that it might relieve those who are widows indeed . ||| La'pa a'na patke ' a makpesiay ida , la ' romni nayanni de patyata id etla , de yana nollia limni la hima-re'ela ' patyata de , ne yana nran wawayanni pa jema'ata ramkek to'ola . Hade emkade pede jema'ata namkek to'ola patyata maka plollolli de patyat memna .
Let the elders who rule well be counted worthy of double honor , especially those who labor in the word and in teaching . ||| Ne la'pa jema'ata o'tani-matni maka kar pia lol talanni de , rwahla prehenni-maunu re la ralamni re'eni woru de , ne rerehniana o'ta-mata mak kape'el pa rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni me rwatutu-rwaye ' nohora de .
For the Scripture says , You shall not muzzle the ox when it treads out the grain . And , The laborer is worthy of his wages . ||| Yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e rhorat targa , Hayor miaka ktepartarlia kwatei-kwahapra metma onde wetra ' lawna totpena ema rkur dodioinia la ' harni , de yana mpiatiehra nurnu , mere miollia pa na'ana metam de . Emkade wal lia ' Puka ralamni de e rhorat targ walia de , Riy mak kari de yana tapre'et nohora twahla prehenni .
Do n't receive an accusation against an elder except at the word of two or three witnesses . ||| Yana tatlin pa twaghala o'ta-mata ida , atiaru mak ktutrier niohor pa e nhi ' hal de riy woru , onde narehelia hare .
Those who sin , reprove in the sight of all , that the rest also may be in fear . ||| Mak khi ' do ' a-hala de , tpolliohora la jema'ata nhiopannu ralamni , totpena mutu korni mana ramta'at la nhioli-lieta mak khala .
I command you in the sight of God , and the Lord Jesus Christ , and the chosen angels , that you observe these things without prejudice , doing nothing by partiality . ||| La ' a Uplerlawna gaini ralamni , Kristus Yesus , me Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu maka ha rwalir niana , a'ukot tiy o ' de mliernohora a li'ru di , ne la'pa muetlia o'ta-mata krei plolli-halli de yana muheri-muhelta inonmu la riy halli wawannu .
Lay hands hastily on no one . Do n't be a participant in other people 's sins . Keep yourself pure . ||| Yana pleta-plet pa mrian limmu la riy wawannu pa na'ala Itmatromni kniarni . La'pa riy rhi ' a do ' a-hala de yana mrie'ela . Mutiak kalwiedwed inonmu , totpena ploi-ple'eru la hare honona .
Be no longer a drinker of water only , but use a little wine for your stomach 's sake and your frequent infirmities . ||| Onnila omumehra lawna , awuak de yana muemnia gera nmeh ' a mere muemun walia arka oke ' a pa nodgiota anin yata la apanmu .
Some men 's sins are evident , preceding them to judgment , and some also follow later . ||| La ' ler maka edon rhudi-rpar ma'ta riy do'oni-halli , de riy rden la hala wawannu de nmeh ' a namemieheiya . Mere doma do'oni-halli mak dodo'ondi edon nayamkeka hota nalharia pa rat wualia .
In the same way also there are good works that are obvious , and those that are otherwise ca n't be hidden . ||| Emkade walia nhioli-lieta kalwiedweda de nayamkeka , me mak edonna kayamkeka kuku ' eti mana edonna nayade ' pa nodi liarni .
Let as many as are bondservants under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honor , that the name of God and the doctrine not be blasphemed . ||| Ama , mukot la hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara makpesiay totpa hota rat niohora de ir upni-matromni rla ' geni pa rlernana nhiu'ru-nhielma . La ' talan emkade totpena yana riy ralernia Uplerlawna nanni onde ita wniatutnu-wniaye'eni .
Those who have believing masters , let them not despise them because they are brothers , but rather let them serve them , because those who partake of the benefit are believing and beloved . Teach and exhort these things . ||| Ne ata-wa'ara maka matromni makpesiay , de yana nalernia upni-matromni yoma ir rewre'wa pa makpesiay ira . Rwaldioin la de ratu rhu'ru-rhelma me yeher to ' a pa ramkek la matromni de samounu , yoma ir upni-matromni de rora ir rewre'wa pa pesiayni ida me matromni de Uplerlawna ralamni nala . Hari de mak ompuatut ir pa ir rhi ' a ne mpuakwak pa ir rlernohora re . La ' hari honona di mpuatutga la re , me muno ' a-mu'atga re .
If anyone teaches a different doctrine and does n't consent to sound words , the words of our Lord Jesus Christ , and to the doctrine which is according to godliness , ||| Ne he ' a nwatutga wniatutu dom to ' a la wniatutu ri pa edonna nlernohora ita wniatutnu mak kaplola mak kwatiaga Itmatromni Yesus Kristus me mak kwatutga it pa tlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni ,
he is conceited , knowing nothing , but obsessed with arguments , disputes , and word battles , from which come envy , strife , insulting , evil suspicions , ||| de riy de emeka kospo'ona ida de . Mere riy maka kaplinu-kaplo ' a id hade , e ralamni nko ' i nan la nhiok lira-pah ' a wawa me yahuri-yawo'ora ne rhi ' a lira mak kodi mak katlin la wniatutnu de la yalernu-yaha ' a pa to ' a-taiya , yapupu-yaheri , id ralamni nal nana id gahani me idma edon npesiay ida .
constant friction of people of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth , who suppose that godliness is a means of gain . Withdraw yourself from such . ||| Me yahuri-yawo'or matmiati-molmuolu , yoma wniarorni-wnialaini re tututu-wawuaga , la ' walia yoma ir edon rlernan etia wniatutu mak kaplol owa'ana . Ratniekamde hota lol agama loini-talanni pa hota rler la re ' a-tniaru kupna-kai .
But godliness with contentment is great gain . ||| Meman neka la , la'pa itlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni me it ralamni nahepur nohora hya ' maka it gahani , de itlernana unut lawna .
For we brought nothing into the world , and we certainly ca n't carry anything out . ||| Yoma la ' ler maka rtor doin ita , de itakleha lawra-raini . Ne hota la ' ler mak hota it mat die , yohya ' id mana ta'enia itodia la noh mati-rai miolu .
But having food and clothing , we will be content with that . ||| La ' hade pede hornama ya'ana-yemnu , hewewta-naniairi erla de hadewa .
But those who are determined to be rich fall into a temptation , a snare , and many foolish and harmful lusts , such as drown men in ruin and destruction . ||| Mere riy mak kiwa ktaru , de dodo'on nekpa nlernohora me ema rtuin targa la klieratni la ' a ralamni yapalli . Ne la ' a podaknu mak kodia wnieyat lawna , ralma yapalia haneka-harahu wuawannu , de ha nodia it la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Hare emolmolla i'n maka kiwa kte'la la ainiara naplin niek la ema rhewra kenna .
For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil . Some have been led astray from the faith in their greed , and have pierced themselves through with many sorrows . ||| Yoma tmat lia kupna wawannu , de do ' a-hala honona rha'at la it reranni . La ' riy dom de rhokar kupna nande rawlar dioinia it agamni wniatutnu , pa reiniande rler tar lia kleha-lar lawna pa rko ' a-rkakur la lelera-melmela .
But you , man of God , flee these things , and follow after righteousness , godliness , faith , love , perseverance , and gentleness . ||| Mere o ' di de Uplerlawna gahani o ' a mak kla ' E hopopanni-lili'irnu , muhal doinia hare honona . Muhak toto ' meman pa mpual lia riy makden la plol wawna la ' a Uplerlawna matni yamkekni , mpuesiaya Yesus Kristus , muatu mhima-mrie ' riy walmu la kleheni-larni , murur lia mutahan nana ralammu la nniahora-nniala ' a , ne mhuoli-mlieta mnapal la riy .
Fight the good fight of faith . Take hold of the eternal life to which you were called , and you confessed the good confession in the sight of many witnesses . ||| Emolmolan neka mak kawlari ida nwaleran pa nlernana siewa mak ha ralla mak karehi , de mpualeran la pesiaymu la Yesus Kristus . Mpuo'la-mliekur toto'ola kniarmu , totpena muakokan nohora siewa mormiormu-dardiarmu mak kodi liarni . Yoma la ' hade pede Uplerlawna Npolg o ' a la ' a ler maka omliernohora me mpuayow la riy rahu gaini ralamni pa mpuesiay Yesus Kristus .
I command you before God who gives life to all things , and before Christ Jesus who before Pontius Pilate testified the good confession , ||| Ne dodo'ondi de , la ' Uplerlawna mak kala mormiori la ' haneknek wawannu , me la ' a Kristus Yesus mak ktutrier pia kakot nohora plollolli la ' Pontius Pilatus , a'ukot tiy o ' totpa
that you keep the commandment without spot , blameless until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ , ||| mliernohora nnio ' a-niatu ri honona de mual toto ' ralammu pa naploi-naple'era nmou-nwitna pa nodi liarni totpa mukleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti pa nla ntut tiaru-nte ' tar mueman la ' a ler maka hota Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'ana .
which at the right time he will show , who is the blessed and only Ruler , the King of kings and Lord of lords . ||| Maimiaini de pena Uplerlawna ed mak kmeh ' a ketlia ler meni . E ' ed maka ha ra'uli-rawedi ra'unni-ramta'ata . E ' nanpena mak kodi plolli Enmemeh ' a to ' a . E ' de Ray miak kamtatan rer lia lodanni-hairni , me Matromlawan la upa-matroma honona .
He alone has immortality , dwelling in unapproachable light , whom no man has seen nor can see , to whom be honor and eternal power . Amen . ||| Enmeh ' a nanpena matmiati-molmuolu edonna nodi plolli la . Enmori-ndar lia liplipni-kamka'mani ralamni , ne riy id mana edonna nwakriania . Rimormiori id mana edon namkek targa de . Mai pia tlilili-tmamuau lia , ta'uli-tawedia pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
Charge those who are rich in this present age that they not be arrogant , nor have their hope set on the uncertainty of riches , but on the living God , who richly provides us with everything to enjoy , ||| Mak kre ' a-ktar lia noh di wawannu de , ompuak la totpena yana po'ona tniarnu , ne yana rha'ar aranni la yohya ' mak edon kamtemna , emekwalima re ' a-tniaru . Mukot la re pa rha'ar aranni la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kala hare honona mai ita , de narehi-nalawna , totpena ta'ana-temnia , tsewta-tnairia pa it ralamni nahepuepru .
that they do good , that they be rich in good works , that they be ready to distribute , willing to share , ||| Mpuak la re totpena rtutga kalwiedni liawanni totpena tlina-tmat nana ralam kalwiedni , me yara'ani-yapallu .
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come , that they may lay hold of eternal life . ||| La ' eda de pede , emeknekama mak kre ' a-ktaru re rawok wutga kupna-kai pa rwewiei-rnarnara ler maka kmai die , de mukot la re totpena hota rawok wutga hihi'ini-yapyapni kalwiedwedni totpa hota irlernana tnikilgeni-nhiapargeni la Orgahi-Orha ' a gaini ralamni la ' a ler maka hota Nmai die . Emkade mamain de hota ir rlernana mormiori plalahwa mak itiwra mormiori plollola .
Timothy , guard that which is committed to you , turning away from the empty chatter and oppositions of what is falsely called knowledge , ||| Ama , wniatutu plollola mak omliernana re , de mutiak kalwiedweda Timotius . Oliet memnu la wniahaur mak edonna klol talla yoma edon nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , me pniok lira-pniah ' a wawa , mak kakot nohora nhiortaplinu maka ha rweta la lira-yatu mere edon nora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu ramneneha .
which some profess , and thus have wandered from the faith . Grace be with you . Amen . ||| Yoma riy rakota riwra , ira rlernana lira-yatu re pede rwaldioinia pa rmalawna la wniatutu-wniaye ' a agama mak irpesiay ulga . Ama , awuak de Itmatromlawanni Nala ra'ani-pallu nanaloi-nanatru miy . A kalwie'du tiy miy , Paulus
Paul , an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God , according to the promise of the life which is in Christ Jesus , to Timothy , my beloved child , Grace , mercy , and peace , from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord . ||| A'nu Timotius mak kden rer lia a ralmu . Mak khorta horat di , de a ' u Paulus . Nlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pede Kristus Yesus Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a ' pua a lia makodi Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni totpa a'ukot nohora mormiori-dardiar miaka Uplerlawna Nano'taru . Mormiori-dardiar die hota itlernana yoma itora Kristus Yesus tla ' lir ida . Awuak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de Nora Itmatromni Kristus Yesus ralma kalwiedni pa Nala ra'ani-pallu me kalwieda-paitiota nanaloi-nanatru o ' a .
I thank God , whom I serve as my forefathers did , with a pure conscience . How unceasing is my memory of you in my petitions , night and day ||| A ' u'uli-uwedia Uplerlawna , maka aghima-rie ' a kniarni de emekwalia ululu la u'pu-tga'ru . Aghima-rie ' a de agodi ihru ploi-ralma plele'era . Asiumbaini la lelera-melmela de a ' u'uli-uwed reria Uplerlawna onnila o ' pesiaymu .
longing to see you , remembering your tears , that I may be filled with joy , ||| Asiumbain de aghoratreria ralam mayo'omu la ' ler maka itsakar talla . La ' hade pede a ralmu nmormior pia itwatroma , totpena a ralmu namtemna .
having been reminded of the sincere faith that is in you , which lived first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice and , I am persuaded , in you also . ||| Aghoratnana la ' o pesiaymu toto ' la Yesus Kristus , emolmolan walia upmu Lois makpesiay ulga , nanpena inmu Eunike pesiayni . Ne a ralmu nat muemna de omuor ira mimneneha .
For this cause , I remind you that you should stir up the gift of God which is in you through the laying on of my hands . ||| Hade ed mak kariei pia awuagahniorta o ' a , totpena emeka nhi'inde riy ramor rieria ai totpena yana ai nmati , de hota mniair rieria ruri-lai miaka Uplerlawna Nala tiy o ' la ' lera ariana a li'mu la ' o wawanmu .
For God did n't give us a spirit of fear , but of power , love , and self-control . ||| Yana mumta'ata mniair rieria ruri-lai die yoma la ' a Nhiw Lulul miaka Uplerlawna Nala mai ita , de edonna Nod it la yamta'ata . Mere Nhiw Lulul die Nhi ' it pa taruri-talai me Nodia it pa ittulla-tsaynia it rimormior wialli me totpa tatu todi it inonni la hanek-harahu wuawannu .
Therefore do n't be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord , nor of me his prisoner , but endure hardship for the Good News according to the power of God , ||| Ama , onnila Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Ntulan mai ita , pede yana tmola-tma ' a la takot nohora Itmatromlawanni ne yan walia mmuola-mmua ' a la ' mai a ' u , yoma onnila edonna aghi ' a yatyatni pa a'utnioran la roma nhio'la , mere yoma Yesus tototni-rerieini . Yana mmuola-mmua ' a mere lol Uplerlawna rurni-laini makden tiy o ' a de hota mrie'ela pa muor rewre'wa a ' pua ttutulu-takwara nniahora-nniala ' a yamuki-yama'ala onnila takot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni .
who saved us and called us with a holy calling , not according to our works , but according to his own purpose and grace , which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal , but has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior , Christ Jesus , who abolished death , and brought life and immortality to light through the Good News . ||| Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna ita ne Npolg it pa tla ' E gah wamueheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala . Enhi ' a hare honona de edonna Namkek la hya ' maka it tsi ' a-tyapi oleka la ' a it mormiorni di , mere Nhi ' hare honona de Nhapar rer lia E kalwiedni maka Ha wniaror oleka la ler maka Uplerlawna edon Nakoki-nayap mia'ta nohkerna . Mere la'pa dodo'ondi na'nama Uplerlawna Ntutga kalwiedni-paitiotni de mai ita , de tamkek nek la Kristus Yesus maimiaini , de emekneka Makamori-Kalewna mak katowar oleka matmiati la ' yawa , ne Nodia mormiori-dardiari pa Nmai . Enayakot olek la ' mormiori-dardiari mak kodi liarni de la ' E Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni ralamni .
For this I was appointed as a preacher , an apostle , and a teacher of the Gentiles . ||| La ' a Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de , pede Uplerlawna Ntut a ' pua a lia makodi E lir kalwiedni pa a'ukot nohora lir de me awuatutga la riy .
For this cause I also suffer these things . Yet I am not ashamed , for I know him whom I have believed , and I am persuaded that he is able to guard that which I have committed to him against that day . ||| La ' hade pede atiutulu-lielewua yamola-yama ' a lui-nuhru la ' roma nhio'la di ralamni mere a ' g edon muola-mua ' a , yoma a lia maka ha rtoran reria a ' u , yoma apuesiay toto ' meman la Yesus Kristus . Ne apuesiay miemna Enatiak reri E Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni mak Enhopan pa a'ukot nohora la'pa ler maka hota Nmai owa'ana ntutu-nte'ewa .
Hold the pattern of sound words which you have heard from me , in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus . ||| Timotius , ompuatutu-mpuaye ' a de mliernohora wniatutu plollola maka awuatutu-wuaye ' tiy o ' a . Ne yan memmemna mpualer la pesiaymu onde ralam kalwiedmu . Itlernan oleka ruri-lai pa tsi ' hari honona yoma itler wutg olek la Kristus Yesus .
That good thing which was committed to you , guard through the Holy Spirit who dwells in us . ||| Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a lir kalwiedni de , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak kodi plolli la ' it mormiorni , himni-re'eni mai ita pa mutiak kalwiedweda wniatutu mak kalweli , maka Uplerlawna Nhopna omukot nohora .
This you know , that all who are in Asia turned away from me , of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes . ||| Omuat niohora olek la ' a Asia di yapatni de riy honona raltarga a ' u . Figelus nor Hermogenes nek de raltarg a ' u wali .
May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus , for he often refreshed me , and was not ashamed of my chain , ||| Mere awuak de pena Orgahi-Orha ' a ralam kalwiedni pa Nmeh ' a Nwoili-nwahla Onisiforus romni mniotni . Yoma Onisiforus nodia a lia muki-hepru . Alia ' oleka roma nhio'la mere Onisiforus edonna nmola-nma ' a la ' hade .
but when he was in Rome , he sought me diligently and found me ||| Nte ' tar lia letlawna Roma dewade nodi liarni pa nwahak a ' u .
the Lord grant to him to find the Lord 's mercy in that day , and in how many things he served at Ephesus , you know very well . ||| Ne omuat mueman walia la Epsus de e ntulan mai a ' u . Pena Itmatromlawanni Nhoratreria la hihi'ini-yapyapni de pa Nhi ' samomuou lia ' a e ' a la ' ler maka hota Itmatromlawanni ed mak ktorna watghudi mai riy nohkerna honona .
You therefore , my child , be strengthened in the grace that is in Christ Jesus . ||| Mere a'nu Timotius o ' a , mdien rer lia ruri-lai maka itlernan oleka wa onnila Kristus Yesus ralam kalwiedni mai ita , la ' ralam kalwiedni mak itlernana yoma it tor oleka Yesus de ihru ida-ralm ida .
The things which you have heard from me among many witnesses , commit the same things to faithful men who will be able to teach others also . ||| Wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kaplola maka ha mutlin oleka , maka awuatutu-wuaye'ela riy rahu re pa ratlin nohora-rmat nohora oleka ha plollolli , de mukot nohor la riy maka ha mpuesiaya totpa hota rla ' maka katu kaltieri-katiani pa nodia la riy dom owa'ana to ' a .
You therefore must endure hardship as a good soldier of Christ Jesus . ||| Ama , hota omlier la kalwieda-paitiota yoma omutlin a lira wnialliohoru di emkadille , de hota mliernohora nhiolia mak ka'ara ida mak katu ntutulu-nlelewua haneknek wawannu . Pede hota emeka Kristus Yesus limni-rorni makdenreri , muatu mtiutulu-mlielewua hya'-hya ' honona pa muor rewre'wa ami .
No soldier on duty entangles himself in the affairs of life , that he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier . ||| Me hota mliernohora nhiolia emekwalima mak kodi keki-rautu ida mak ktorna kniarni de edonna nwo'la-nlekur la inon wamueheni , yoma nwo'la-nlekur de totpena nhi ' plollolli la e o'tani Komandan de ralma-riorni . Emkade walia o ' a la ' Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni .
Also , if anyone competes in athletics , he is n't crowned unless he has competed by the rules . ||| Yana mliernohora nhioli emekwalima mak kawlari ida mak edonna nlernana wutu-lai miaha , yoma edonna natlina-natailla wniatutu-wniaye ' a . Hota omliernohora hya ' honona maka Uplerlawna Nakot targa de , totpena omliernana siewa mak hota Enala .
The farmer who labors must be the first to get a share of the crops . ||| Mak kmaliwtu-kma'odaw la ' a yawuli-yatniamni , de e ' ed mak ka'an ulga nhyi'ini mniotni . Emkade walia o ' a , muatu mtiulla-mkiari werwerta la Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni , totpena hota omliernana kniarmu wniahlani .
Consider what I say , and may the Lord give you understanding in all things . ||| Mpuaror kalwiedweda hya ' mak a'ukota ri . Yoma hota Itmatromlawanni nanpena ed mak kala wniarora-wnialai tiy o ' a la ' a hari honona .
Remember Jesus Christ , risen from the dead , of the offspring of David , according to my Good News , ||| La'pa mului-munuhru polpuol ina-wakwak ama de mhuoratreria Yesus Kristus , Daud duratni-waitni , yoma Uplerlawna Namori owa'an E ' la matmiatni ralamni . Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni di ed maka nhi'inde a'ukot nohora la riy .
in which I suffer hardship to the point of chains as a criminal . But God 's word is n't chained . ||| Ne la'pa mlier la kropna-krieutu de mhuoratreria a ' wuali yoma alier la kropanni-krieutnu onnila a'ukot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de . Rerehnian de rwutu-rkoh a ' die emekneka riy makwunu-makwenna id a ' u . Mere emkade ho'mana Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de edon natniutwu .
Therefore I endure all things for the chosen ones ' sake , that they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory . ||| Hade pede a ' g edonna wualer la nniahora-nniala ' a kropanni-krieutnu honona , mere awualeran pa a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni totpa hota riy maka Uplerlawna Nwaliri oleka yoma ralamni Nala , de irlernan walia yamori-yalewna onnila Kristus Yesus , me rler la E genni tutullu-lolo'oni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nodi liarni .
This saying is trustworthy , For if we died with him , we will also live with him . ||| Ama , mdienrer setia lia hare honona , yoma lir di de naplol memna pede mpuesiaya , de , la'pa itawlar dioini it do'oni-halli totpa emeka tmat niohora olek E ' wa , de hota itmor niohora walia E ' a .
If we endure , we will also reign with him . If we deny him , he also will deny us . ||| Ne la'pa ittutulu-takwara nniahora-nniala ' a mere it edon twaler la pesiayni de hota itor E ' pa todi plolli . Mere la'pa itreher doin E ' la de hota Enreher doin wali ita la .
If we are faithless , he remains faithful , for he ca n't deny himself . ||| It edonna tdenrer lia E ' a , mere Endenreri , yoma nhiolli-lietni nden nek la pa nodi liarni .
Remind them of these things , charging them in the sight of the Lord that they do n't argue about words to no profit , to the subverting of those who hear . ||| Timotius , la ' pa mukot momuoga hari . Muala lira nnio ' a-wawa niat lia jema'ata re , de mpuet la Uplerlawna nanni totpena yana rahuri-rawo'or nohora lira-tunu . Hare edonna rperkuna mere rweyata-rwaniawua rira pesiayni .
Give diligence to present yourself approved by God , a workman who does n't need to be ashamed , properly handling the Word of Truth . ||| Mhi ' arur miatmati totpa mlia ' mak kwatutga wniatutu mak kaplola mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna . La ' talan emkade , pede hota edon mmuola-mmua ' a me totpena wniatutmu de nla ' Uplerlawna ralamni .
But shun empty chatter , for it will go further in ungodliness , ||| Mere wniahaur maka edonna klol talla , ne maka itatlina de edon nor Uplerlawna wniatutnu ramneneha , de mriei lia wali , totpena yan mutlina . Wniahauru mak emkare , de rodia riy pa yeher to ' a rler la yatyatni .
and those words will consume like gangrene , of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus , ||| Wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak emkare de emekneka no ' mak ka'an lola rialma kanker pa nhewra . Hare emekwalima Himeneus nora Filetus .
men who have erred concerning the truth , saying that the resurrection is already past , and overthrowing the faith of some . ||| Hare e rwir olek la walli pa emekwalima riy mak kiwra poka ina , mere pok ihi nhiwar la ' walli . Rhi ' pa makpesiay oleka dom mana raplinu-raplo ' nohora ir pesiayni . Yoma rakot nohora riwra mak kmor lia matmiati ralamni de ntutu-nte ' olek wa .
However , God 's firm foundation stands , having this seal , The Lord knows those who are his , and , Let every one who names the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness . ||| Mere Uplerlawna kniarni la makpesiay re ralamni de , taken niana rawilu-rawalia la ' genni . Hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana de , emolmolan nekama rariria roma ida wniatatgenni pa ta'en niana rom de rawo'la nana . Ne mak e rhorat tar lia watu liar yanulu de niwra , Itmatromni Nat niohora E rimormiorni . Ne he ' to ' a mak kiwra ir mana Itmatromni hanni ira , de hota yana rhi ' owa'ana do ' a-hala .
Now in a large house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver , but also of wood and of clay . Some are for honor and some for dishonor . ||| Ama , mutlin la a lira wnialliohoru di . La ' a rom lawna id ralamni de itamkek nana lola-wra ' u harahu . Dom de e rala maha , dom de rnairia mah wawahra . Mere dom mana rhi ' a de rnairia ora-au onde tani . Lola-wra ' u mak samomuou memna re , emeka maha onde mah wawahra , de rnairia la woka-le ' u mak emkameni memna . Ne lola-wra ' u maka rhi ' a la ora-au onde tani , de rnairia pa lera-lera nek la rodia rhopliala haga ' u .
If anyone therefore purges himself from these , he will be a vessel for honor , sanctified , and suitable for the master 's use , prepared for every good work . ||| Emkade wal pia la'pa riy ida edon natlin la wniatutu mak edon kaplola de , pena nla ' riy maka ha rwalir nian pa nkar lia Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni . Hota emeka lola-wra ' u mak welli werta maka rnairia la woka-le ' u mak emkameni memna , hota riy de nla ' Uplerlawna gahani maka nperkun la E ' a . Nhi'targa pa Uplerlawna Nnairia e ' la kniari hya ' to ' a maka kodia la kalwiedni .
Flee from youthful lusts , but pursue righteousness , faith , love , and peace with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart . ||| Ama , olie'tu la he ' i-hepru tuwari-laweru hararara-hatrapriapi mak kod o la yatni-halli . Mupepe'ela totpa mhuoli-mlieta la plol wawna , ompuesiay mieman la Yesus wniatutnu plollolli , muatga mtiulla-msiaynia rimormior wialmu , me yana mhi ' a kokokna-rariarni . Mere mkialwied nohora riy mak ksumbain la Orgahi-Orha ' a de rala ralma ploi-ple'era .
But refuse foolish and ignorant questionings , knowing that they generate strife . ||| Yana mlier wut lia nhiok lira-pniah ' a wawa la ' a wniahauru podku-padku mak edon kperkuna . Yoma muatga la ' wniahaur mak emkade rhi ' to ' a yahuri-yawo'ora .
The Lord 's servant must not quarrel , but be gentle toward all , able to teach , patient , ||| Mere riy mak kar lia Uplerlawna kniarni de edonna nkar lia kniokna-riarni , yahuri-yawo'ora . Mere natu nhu'ru-nhelma la ' a rimormior wialli , ne nwatutu-nwaye ' a riy , ne edon nawenan taru .
in gentleness correcting those who oppose him . Perhaps God may give them repentance leading to a full knowledge of the truth , ||| Natu nhu'ru-nhelma , la npolliohora maka o'ta watu , totpena twak de riy maka ha npolliohor de Uplerlawna Ntulan pa rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioini do'oni-halli pa rlernohora Uplerlawna wniatutnu plollola .
and they may recover themselves out of the devil 's snare , having been taken captive by him to do his will . ||| La'pa emkade de hota rhedum la do'oni-halli , ne rtikli etia hegana tniokalli tali . Yoma hegana amlawanni npudi-nakla ir oleka wa , totpa rlernohora e wniarorni-wnialaini .
But know this , that in the last days , grievous times will come . ||| Mhuoratreri hadi , la'pa nmai wia lera hohoni maka ha rakot tar die , de hota itler la lui-nuhru polpuol inni-wakwak amni .
For men will be lovers of self , lovers of money , boastful , arrogant , blasphemers , disobedient to parents , unthankful , unholy , ||| Yoma rimormiori hota edonna namkek la rimormior wialli ne nhorat nan to'ola inon wamueheni . Nhiolli-lietni de nwarekan to ' kupna , me natulu-napetna inonni pa polpuolu-hawaun nohora re'eni-tniarnu me inon wamueheni . Rwahauria rira kleheni-larni me rapolu-raliella Uplerlawna nanni . Upa-a'na edon ratlin la inni-amni pa rora rahuri-rawo'ora . Rakleha ralam kalwied la ' a riy mak khi ' kalwied la ira , ne rakleha ya'unni-yamta'ata la Uplerlawna .
without natural affection , unforgiving , slanderers , without self-control , fierce , not lovers of good , ||| Rakleha tniulan la mutwualli . La inni-narni nek de edonna . Idma edonna ntelan nana-naut nan ida . Rapupu-raheria rimormior wialli , me ralernu-raha ' a rira nan kalwiedni . Edonna rhol lia mtiertierannu , mere rler teman la riy halli pa rliwra-rkaklia rimormior wialli . Yoma raplin niohora rodia inon wamueheni la plol wawna , me ralamni edon ral nana hya ' mak kaplola .
traitors , headstrong , conceited , lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God , ||| Rhol lia tulu-petan la rimormior wialli . Ne la ' riy gaini ralamni rtot pa rhi ' samomuou , mere rla'awa la geni ida , dewade rahe ' i-ramalia onde rhi ' yatyat ira . Ir edon rwaror samomuou mere pleta-plet pa rhi ' do ' a-ryap hiala hya ' to'owa . Rler la nohkerna mukni-heparnu mere edonna rapal niana Uplerlawna gahani .
holding a form of godliness but having denied its power . Turn away from these , also . ||| Tamkek la de rape'el la rkola tieru-rawur nehla mere ir edon rreiniana-ra'nana Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli pa Nodi plolli la ira pede la ' mormiorni-dardiarni ralamni de edon rlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni . Muha'lu la ' riy mak emkade .
For some of these are people who creep into houses and take captive gullible women loaded down with sins , led away by various lusts , ||| Yoma la era re de , riy dom mak kwatutu wniatutu mak edon kaplola . E rtota kmamah'ani la roma-lewu pa rwaka pat mak podku-padku ne mak kler olek la do ' a-hala liawanni pa rapali tio ' la hya'-hya ' to ' a mak ka'hira ir ralma-riorni .
always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth . ||| A'na patke ' a re rwak la ira totpena rwatut ir la Uplerlawna yala'ani . Mere ta'en niana a'na patke ' a re rna'erit nana wniatutu-wniaye ' plollola doma .
Even as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses , so these also oppose the truth , men corrupted in mind , who concerning the faith are rejected . ||| La ' emkamenila Yanes nora Yambres rmalawan la Musa la ' a ululu de , emkade wal lia mak kwatutga riy pa rmalawan la Uplerlawna wniatutnu plollola . Irwaror to ' a yatyatni-halalli me ir pesiayni mak edon kaplola de nareiniande Uplerlawna Nwayotlia ira .
But they will proceed no further . For their folly will be evident to all men , as theirs also came to be . ||| Ne hota ir edonna rler la ga ' a , yoma noha mniotni rat momuoga ir podaknu-padaknu emolmolan walima riy ramkek memna Yanes nora Yambres podaknu .
But you followed my teaching , conduct , purpose , faith , patience , love , steadfastness , ||| Mere o ' di de muat niohor oleka wniatutu-wniaye ' u , nhio'lu-lie'tu me a mormio'ru onni . Orgahamu e mumkek memna a pesia'yu la Yesus ne a kalwie'du la riy neknek wawannu . Omuat wualia aghur niohora rira me atiahana a ralmu pa a'urur lia tiutulu-lielewua
persecutions , and sufferings-those things that happened to me at Antioch , Iconium , and Lystra . I endured those persecutions . The Lord delivered me out of them all . ||| nniahora-nniala ' a , polpuol i'nu-wakwak a'mu honona . La ' hare honona de rhi ' harella Antiokia , Ikonium me la ' Listra . Nniahora-nniala ' a mai a ' u emkade ho'mana , mere Itmatromni Nrei a lia gera tlinni-ai aratni Nalewna a ' u .
Yes , and all who desire to live godly in Christ Jesus will suffer persecution . ||| Meman neka la he ' mak kiwa klernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni yoma nora Kristus Yesus rla ' lir ida , de hota nler la yawuhi-yawe'eta .
But evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse , deceiving and being deceived . ||| Ne riy mak kden la hala wawannu me riy mak ka'ohpa-kalahara , hota ra'ititar rer lia maklekalli-makdiainni . Rputra-rpalka riy mere rwaldioinia de riy rputra-rpalk owa'ana ira .
But you remain in the things which you have learned and have been assured of , knowing from whom you have learned them . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana Timotius o ' a , mtiorrer rer pitpitga wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kaplola mak ha mliernan oleka , me maka ha mpuesiaya penpuenu tetema , yoma omuat niohora am di maka mpatutga oleka tiy o'owa , de ampatutga lira-tunu plollola .
From infancy , you have known the holy Scriptures which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus . ||| Mhuoratreria la ' a lera omdien ma'ta la lokmera-papay de omuatg oleka Puk Lululli die lirni . Ne Puk Lululli die ed maka kodi o ' la wniarora-wnialai la ' a mormiori-dardiari mak kodi liarni , onnila pesiaymu la Kristus Yesus .
Every Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for teaching , for reproof , for correction , and for instruction in righteousness , ||| Hare honona maka ha rhorat targa la Puk lawan de , de nwatiaga Uplerlawna , ne hota nperkun la ' a wniatutu-wniaye ' a plollola , pa ra rpolliohora me ra rwale'era riy mak khala . Ne ra rwatutga rimormiori totpena mormiorni nlola Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
that each person who belongs to God may be complete , thoroughly equipped for every good work . ||| Emkade pede Puka Lululli die , de rtutu-rhana riy mak kar lia Uplerlawna kniarni , totpa rwahi ' a pa rhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kod lia kalwiedni honona .
I command you therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ , who will judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom , ||| Yesus Kristus hota Nawali owa'ana la ' noh di wawannu pa Ntoran watghudi la ' a mak kmati me mak kmormiori . Ne hota Enmai die , Nodi plolli pa emek Ray . La ' hade pede awuak lilili-mamuau tiy o ' a , la ' a Uplerlawna Nora Kristus gaini ralamni .
preach the word , be urgent in season and out of season , reprove , rebuke , and exhort with all patience and teaching . ||| Mlier pa mlia mukot nohora kot mak kwatiawua Uplerlawan de . Ne mpuakdieh ' a pa mlier la ga ' a totpena riy ratlin nana . Ratlina onde rahmen ratlina , rwayowa onde rahmena . Mlier pa muhmuakur la re , de mpuolliohora riy mak khala , ne muodia la ga ' a . Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a de , mutatahan ralammu .
For the time will come when they will not listen to the sound doctrine , but having itching ears , will heap up for themselves teachers after their own lusts , ||| Yoma hota la'pa nte'ela lerni , de riy rahmena-rapraiya wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kaplola . Mere rwaldioinia pa rmeh ' a rhi ' to ' gahani . Ne rawoka-rale'ga tungkur riahu pa rwatutga hya ' maka ir ralamni nko ' i nana pa ratlin la .
and will turn away their ears from the truth , and turn away to fables . ||| Hota rhodla tlinni la hya ' mak kaplola , mere hota rheri tlinni la wniahaur tuntunu .
But you be sober in all things , suffer hardship , do the work of an evangelist , and fulfill your ministry . ||| La'pa emkade ho'mana muatu muodia inonmu la ' a hya ' to ' a me emkameni to ' a . Murur lia yatahan ralma la ' nniahora-nniala ' a , lui-nuhru . Mkiari pia muodi liarmu pa emekwalia riy mak kakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de la riy mak edon katlin ma'ta , ne mula ' kalwiedwed nohora kniarmu dom pali la Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni emekwalima mlia mtiomra-mniah ' a riy mak kamehra-kamau , mtiulan la riy kleheni-larni , me mak ka ' a'na riy kapatyata .
For I am already being offered , and the time of my departure has come . ||| Mpualeran la kniarmu de , yoma awuarora la mai a ' die , hota edon nalo'on de amuat wia , yoma rhi ' a pua a lia emeknekama prehena-mau la Uplerlawna .
I have fought the good fight . I have finished the course . I have kept the faith . ||| Hota amuat wia . Mere la ' a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna lir mak kalwiedweda , de a nhio'lu de emolmolan neka mak kawlari ida nhoitio'or doin hya'-hya ' honona pa nwaleran pa nler ul lia hohoni . Aliernohor reria Yesus Kristus wniatutu plollolli pa la nte'ela honi .
From now on , the crown of righteousness is stored up for me , which the Lord , the righteous judge , will give to me on that day , and not to me only , but also to all those who have loved his appearing . ||| Ne hota emeka e rwahi ' targa wutu-lai la riy maka ka'unut la mak kawlari , de la'pa ler maka rhudi-rpara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni ntutu-nte'ewa , de Itmatromni mak ktorna watghudi plollolli de , ed maka kowa wut muaha-lai miaha la a o'tu yoma a nhio'lu-lie'tu plollola la ' Uplerlawna gaini ralamni . Ne hota a ' g edonna mueh ' a ed mak klernana unut de , mere hota riy honona mak kawuwu-kawei Itmatromni .
Be diligent to come to me soon , ||| Timotius , mpualeran pa pleta-plet pa mmuai a ' die .
for Demas left me , having loved this present world , and went to Thessalonica , Crescens to Galatia , and Titus to Dalmatia . ||| Yoma Demas nahal doini olek a lia wa , yoma ralamni napal rieria nohkerna wniarorni . Enla ' olek wa Tesalonika . Mere Kriskes enla ' olek la Galatia ne Titus nla ' a Dalmatia pa rhima-rre ' a Yesus kniarni la ' hande .
Only Luke is with me . Take Mark and bring him with you , for he is useful to me for service . ||| Enekneka Lukas nor a ' tialla . Mpuatroma-mtiahnei Markus ne muora talla pa mmiai . Yoma e ' ed maka nperkun pa nhima-nre ' a lia a knia'ru di .
But I sent Tychicus to Ephesus . ||| La'pa Tikhikus de , a ' g e ghopna nla ' a Epsus .
Bring the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus when you come-and the books , especially the parchments . ||| Ne la'pa ommuai , de muodia raini otna maka a'ultarga la Troas la ' a Karpus romni . Muod wialia a pu'uku re , mere reriehenu de , muod wialia puk maka rhi ' nana la ha ulti re .
Alexander the coppersmith did much evil to me . The Lord will repay him according to his deeds . ||| Aleksander mak kwewla pi'ra-tnier die nhi ' a-nyapi oleka nhioli-lieta dukduka-dakdakni mai a ' u . Pena Itmatromlawanni ed maka kwoili-kwahla nhiolli-lietni de .
Beware of him , for he greatly opposed our words . ||| O ' mana mu'ererma la Aleksander de . Yoma hade ed maka karalam tehra-o'ta wat lia Kot Kalwied-Paitiot de .
At my first defense , no one came to help me , but all left me . May it not be held against them . ||| Ama , la lerni la ukot nohora plo'lu-ha'lu mulaliaini la ' Kaisar roma watghudni-lokarni , de riy id mana edonna nrehgorg a ' u . Honona re rhoitio'or mai a ' u . Mere twakwak de Uplerlawna yana Nwaghala ir la hari honona .
But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me , that through me the message might be fully proclaimed , and that all the Gentiles might hear . So I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion . ||| Mere Itmatromlawanni Nrehgor reri a ' u . Enala rurni-laini mai a ' u , pa a ' g edonna umta'ata ukot nohora Kot Kalwied de , totpena riy Yahudi atia ' a honona mana ratlina , ne a ' muana Uplerlawna Nalewn a lia matmiati ralamni pa emeka ralewna pipi a'na , totpena singa ta'en niana rlihir nana-rnai niana .
And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work and will preserve me for his heavenly Kingdom . To him be the glory forever and ever . Amen . ||| Meman nek la Itmatromlawanni ed mak katiak a lia ' a tniorna malwiru-malganna . E ' ed mak hota kodia kalwiedwed a ' pua kler la Ilyamou-Watyatoha la ' a E lodanni-hairni . Mai pia ttutulu-tlelewua , ta'uli-tawedia pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
Greet Prisca and Aquila , and the house of Onesiphorus . ||| Awuaka kalwie'du la Priskila nora Akwila me Onisiforus romni mniotni .
Erastus remained at Corinth , but I left Trophimus at Miletus sick . ||| Erastus nwarin lia Korintus , ne Trofimus de ultarga yoma namehra tar lia Miletus .
Be diligent to come before winter . Eubulus salutes you , as do Pudens , Linus , Claudia , and all the brothers . ||| Muhak talan pa muplet la woki lerni pa twatroma . Ebulus , Pudes , Linus , me Klaudia , rwak kalwieda tiy o ' a . Emkade wal lia ina-nara maka itora la pesiay ida .
The Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit . Grace be with you . Amen . ||| Twak de Itmatromlawanni Nor o ' talla . Me E ' wal pia Nala ra'ani-pallu tiy miy me Nanaloi-nanatru miy . A kalwied mamni tiy miy , Paulus
Paul , a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ , according to the faith of God 's chosen ones and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness , ||| A ' di de Paulus . Aghi ' horat di la o ' a , a'nu Titus , yoma Paulus a ' di de Uplerlawna hopopanni id a ' u , me a ' g ed maka Yesus Kristus Nhopan pa godia Uplerlawna lir kalwiedni-paitiotni . Uplerlawna Nwalir nian a ' pua Nhopna aghima-rie ' a riy maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana re , totpena pesiayni re rla ' ga ' a . A ' di wal pia ed mak kodia ir la Uplerlawna wniatutnu-wniaye'eni plollola , totpena hota rmor niohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
in hope of eternal life , which God , who ca n't lie , promised before time began , ||| Ne onnila rpesiaya me rat niohora Uplerlawna wniatutnu plollola de pa hota rdella nhia'argeni wawannu , de hota rlernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa mak kodi liarni . Uplerlawna ed mak kano'targ oleka mormiori-dardiari die la ' ululu memna maka Uplerlawna edon Nakoki-nayap mia'ta nohkerna , ne Uplerlawna hota edonan Nwotar lirni .
but in his own time revealed his word in the message with which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior , ||| Uplerlawna mak kamori-kalewna ita , Nmeh ' a neka ed mak khopan pa agod kiota-gal de'eta lirni de . Entutmuata-nkewra ' olek a ' u totpa la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana pa na'nama rimormiori ratlin nana nnio'oni , de a ' wual pia ed mak kakot nohora .
to Titus , my true child according to a common faith , Grace , mercy , and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior . ||| Titus , ama , Aghi ' horat di la o ' a , yoma o ' di de a a'na raralmu o ' a yoma itro ' di de it pesiayni id la Yesus . Awuak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de me Kristus Yesus mak kamori-kalewna ita pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwieda-paitiota tiy o ' a .
I left you in Crete for this reason , that you would set in order the things that were lacking and appoint elders in every city , as I directed you- ||| Ama , la ' ler maka itto'or doin la de , agodia lia'ru ne ompuarin lia noha Kreta totpa omhi ' ahorga hya ' maka edonna kamteman ma'ta . De totpena omriana ina-ama krei la ' a leta-leta honona re . Ne omhuoratreria hya ' maka a'uno ' taru olek tiy o ' a ri .
if anyone is blameless , the husband of one wife , having children who believe , who are not accused of loose or unruly behavior . ||| It ttutga riy ida pa nla ' a o'ta-mata , ina-ama krei de ttutga riy mak ta'en niana riy raklaka la do ' a-hala , yoma riy de nakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti . De de riy maka hawa patke ' a ida nmeh ' a , me upni-a'nani mak klernohor olek Yesus Kristus . Yana ra'ala riy maka upni-a'nani rlernohor neka nohkerna hihi'ini-yapyapni to ' a onde o'ta watnu pa edon ratlin la inni-amni pede riy raklak ira .
For the overseer must be blameless , as God 's steward , not self-pleasing , not easily angered , not given to wine , not violent , not greedy for dishonest gain , ||| Penatu ' a Samasa re , de ra'ala riy mak hota rodi plolli la Uplerlawna kniarni pede twalir die riy mak kakleha do ' a-hala pede taken niana riy raklaka la halli wawannu , de twalir mak edonna kwarehi-kwatalu pede nahmena nlernohora riy ralma-riorni , onde riy maka kahuri-kawo'or lawna onde mak kma'wu , onde mak ktokal limni-kwe'el lakni onde ralamni nden rer lia kupna-kai .
but given to hospitality , a lover of good , sober minded , fair , holy , self-controlled , ||| Ta'ala riy maka niniha-malmiali niohora riy mak kma kwaloha-kwalakta , mak ralamni nala hya ' maka kalwieda-paitiota , maka katahan ralamni la do ' a-hala , mak kakleha do ' a-hal la Uplerlawna , me la rimormior wialli . Ne tamkek la riy mak katu kodi inonni la hanek-harahu wuawannu .
holding to the faithful word which is according to the teaching , that he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine , and to convict those who contradict him . ||| Ta'ala riy maka ralma-riorni edonna nwaler la pesiayni la Yesus Kristus wniatutnu-wniaye'eni plollola mak ampatutga olekwa . Totpa hota natu nhi ' arur lia makpesiay re pesiayni la plol wawannu , ne totpa natu nano ' a-na'atga mak kamatmera la e wniatutnu , totpa irat niohora ir wniarorni de edon naplola .
For there are also many unruly men , vain talkers and deceivers , especially those of the circumcision , ||| Yoma riy rahu mak khi ' oruli-augewat la Yesus wniatutnu maka plollola , de reriehenu riy Yahudi , ir er maka edon ratlin la wniatutu plollola , mere rputra-rpalka riy dom to ' a , de rodia ltieria mak edonna klol talla .
whose mouths must be stopped , men who overthrow whole houses , teaching things which they ought not , for dishonest gain 's sake . ||| Rimormiori mak emkare , de plet pa rhodal nurnu re , yoma ira rla ' a-rmai lia likti-lara harahu pa rwotra-rtalla likatni mniotni re , pede riy mutliawanni rler la wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak edonna klol talla . La ' plollolli de yana rwatut emkade . Rwotra-rtalla riy liawanni yoma ra rahak to ' kupna .
One of them , a prophet of their own , said , Cretans are always liars , evil beasts , and idle gluttons . ||| La ' lera ida ne , riy id la makden Kreta niwra , Riy makdena Kreta ita , de tpultra-tpalka ta'ohpa-talahara . Emolmolan nekama pora-dawra ida nlihir matmata-nhaw riarara duma a'na , de nhi'inde itsi ' yatyata la riy . Ne it wal pia inon werta la kniari me ya'ante'eni . Mak kakot emkade de makwohorulu-ktatrulu id e ' a .
This testimony is true . For this cause , reprove them sharply , that they may be sound in the faith , ||| Ne hya ' maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu die nakota la ' a makden Kreta nhiolli-lietni re , de ha plollola re . La ' hade pede o ' orgahamu ed mak kpolliohora makden Kreta re pa yana rolin doinia wniatutu-wniaye ' a kalwiedweda .
not paying attention to Jewish fables and commandments of men who turn away from the truth . ||| Ne yana ratlin la tuntun Yahudi onde deulu-tatra mak kwatiawua riy mak kwayotlia wniatutu-wniaye ' a plollola re .
To the pure , all things are pure , but to those who are defiled and unbelieving , nothing is pure , but both their mind and their conscience are defiled . ||| Hya ' a-hya ' to'owa momuou-witwitna plollola-mneneha la ' a riy mak kaplola-kamneh ' a . Mere la'pa riy maka ralamni nkoili ne nakleha pesiay , de , mak ko ' i nana plola-mneha okuku ' mana edonna nden la ihranu ralamni . Yoma ihranu ralamni re npenpuenu-nanahala wniarora-wnialai kdeha-ktiahli .
They profess that they know God , but by their deeds they deny him , being abominable , disobedient , and unfit for any good work . ||| Nhi'inde iriwra ir nanpena rat niohora Uplerlawna . Mere wniehwani-liakatni de edonna ntutga . Rhi ' pa emeka Uplerlawna makriarni ne edonna ratlina-ratailla E ' a . Rta'en niana rhi ' nana hya'-hya ' hadomdom maka kalwieda-paitiota .
But say the things which fit sound doctrine , ||| Mere Titus , o ' di nhi'inde mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a wniatutu-wniaye ' a plollola .
that older men should be temperate , sensible , sober minded , sound in faith , in love , and in perseverance , ||| De muno ' a-mu'atga hamtoto ' a totpena ratu rodia inonni pa yana nanni rtuini . Ra ' rer tioto ' a wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kaplol la Uplerlawna , ratu rtulla-rsayni rira ne ratu ratahana hya'-hya ' to ' pa yana rwaler la pesiayni .
and that older women likewise be reverent in behavior , not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine , teachers of that which is good , ||| Me emkade wal lia hapepe ' a re totpena nhiolli-lietni re raplola pa emeka riy mak kla ' olek la Uplerlawna limni ralamni . De , ir de yan memmemna rapupu-raheria rimormior wialli , ne yana rmat lia tgo'-arka . Ir wal pia er maka kwatutu-kwaye ' a a'na patke ' a la loi-talla samomuou .
that they may train the young wives to love their husbands , to love their children , ||| La ' emkade totpena irwatutga a'na patke ' a pa ratu rholi-rlet la hawni-a'nani .
to be sober minded , chaste , workers at home , kind , being in subjection to their own husbands , that God 's word may not be blasphemed . ||| De totpa a'na patke ' a re rwal lia riy mak katu rodi inonni , me rmori-rdar lia plola-mneha mou-witna pa yana ralira-raliai . Rhi ' a in samomuou lia romni mniotni ne ratu rhu'ru-rhelma hawni muanke ' a . La'pa nhiolli-lietni illu-wniehwani emkade , de riy edonna ralernu-raha ' a lir mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna .
Likewise , exhort the younger men to be sober minded . ||| Emkade walia pa nhi'inde muno ' a-mu'atga la hatrapriapi totpena ratu rodi inonni la hanek-harahu wuawannu .
In all things show yourself an example of good works . In your teaching , show integrity , seriousness , incorruptibility , ||| Nla ' a hya ' to ' pa Titus o ' a , mhi ' a inon wamuehemu , de emeka nhior lawar mak ki'ita ahwa lioda contoh la ' a samomuounu . La'pa ompuatutu-mpuaye ' a kalwieda-paitiota mutota plein gaimu la totmemi nanpena mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a rira . La ' wniatutmu ralamni de , muploi-muple'er la haneknek wawannu .
and soundness of speech that ca n't be condemned , that he who opposes you may be ashamed , having no evil thing to say about us . ||| Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a hya ' maka kdella plol wawannu totpa riy edon rlernan nhiapargenni pa rapolu-raliella o wniatutmu de . La ' talla emkade pede eriaimu re rmola-rma ' a yoma rakleha nhiapargen pia rakot nohora it halli .
Exhort servants to be in subjection to their own masters and to be well-pleasing in all things , not contradicting , ||| Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a ata-wa'ara lili'iru-hopopna pa nhi'inde ratlina-ratailla upni-matromni la haneknek wawannu , ne nhi ' a upni-matromni ralamni pa nkalwieda . Ne yana rora upni-matromni rawahla lira .
not stealing , but showing all good fidelity , that they may adorn the doctrine of God , our Savior , in all things . ||| Atia ' a de rkamna ' a upni-matromni hyonni-hyanni . Nhi'inde irtutga la ir inonni wniehwani de samomuou totpa tunni npesiay ira , totpena wniehwani re rodia rira pa rwarora Uplerlawna mak kamori-kalewn ita , de wniatutnu de naplola .
For the grace of God has appeared , bringing salvation to all men , ||| Mpuatutu-mpuaye ' a hari honona yoma Uplerlawna Ntutg oleka kalwiedni-paitiotni la riy honona pa Namori-nalewna noheri woru-lyanti nayanni .
instructing us to the intent that , denying ungodliness and worldly lusts , we would live soberly , righteously , and godly in this present age , ||| Uplerlawna kalwiedni de ed mak kodi it la loi-talla , totpena la ' a it mormiorni di , de yana tsoitio'ora-ttahnei lia Uplerlawna ralma-riorni me yana it ralamni nko ' i nana nohkeran di yatyatni-halalli . Totpa tmor lia noh di wawannu , de tatu todi it inonni pa tla ' riy ploloi-plele'era mak hihi'ini-yapyapni nla ' Uplerlawna ralamni la dodo'ondi
looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior , Jesus Christ , ||| maka it twei tio ' la lera-mel maka ha twei-tnara , de ler mak kodi it la ralam hepuepru . Hota la ' ler de nohkerna hota namkeka Yesus Kristus , de de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , mak kamori-kalewn ita , reheni-lawanni .
who gave himself for us , that he might redeem us from all iniquity and purify for himself a people for his own possession , zealous for good works . ||| Enal oleka inonni mai ita totpa na Ntuwu-nhai it la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni , totpa do ' a-hala edon nodi plolli mai ita . Ne Enhi ' it la E gah wamueheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala ne , mak kape'el toto ' la nhioli-lieta kalwieda-paitiota .
Say these things and exhort and reprove with all authority . Let no one despise you . ||| Mpuatut momuou lia hari honona , muno ' a-mu'atga ne mpuolliohora mak edon klernohora re , de muodia Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni . Yana muolin doinia riy id pa edon pusin nohora o lirmu .
Remind them to be in subjection to rulers and to authorities , to be obedient , to be ready for every good work , ||| Nhi'inde mpuagorahniorta krei upni-a'nani totpena ratu rhu'ru-rhelma , me ratlina-ratailia o'ta-mata mak kodi plolli la horta-hairi kerajaan , ne rwahi ' tar pua rhi ' a-ryapia hihi'ini-yapyapni kalwiedweda .
to speak evil of no one , not to be contentious , to be gentle , showing all humility toward all men . ||| Mukot la ir pa yana rapupu-raheria rira , onde rora rira rahuri-rawo'ora , mere ratu rhu'ru-rhelma . Rholi-rlet de rwehwa-rlakat lol yawa , ne yana rwehwa maran la ' rira .
For we were also once foolish , disobedient , deceived , serving various lusts and pleasures , living in malice and envy , hateful , and hating one another . ||| Yoma ululu , pa emeka riy mak edon kpesiay de itden nek la klieratni . Itpodku-tpadku la Uplerlawna ralma-riorni me tatlinnon kerna , ta ' o'ta watu . Itsi ' a yatyata-halala hya ' to ' a mak ka'hira it ralma-riorni yoma do ' a-hala nodi plolli mai ita . Tmori-tdar lia wniaror yatyata-halala , me itahmen tamkek rira kalwiedni . Ne hya ' reh wiali , de it id mana edon ntelan-naut nan ida .
But when the kindness of God our Savior and his love toward mankind appeared , ||| Kennama itden ma't la do ' a-hala ralamni , mere Uplerlawna mak kamori-kalewn ita Ntutga ra'ani-pallu , me ralam kalwiedni mai ita ,
not by works of righteousness which we did ourselves , but according to his mercy , he saved us through the washing of regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit , ||| de Enrei it la gera tlinni-ai aratni , onnila it edonna tsi ' oleka kalwieda-paitiota , mere onnila E ' orgahani ed maka ralam kalwiedni Nal ita . Ne la ' talan emkadi pa Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna ita , de Nwuri-nohm it la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni pa takleha do ' a-hala , me E Nhiw Lululli Nodi it la yamori-yadari warwuaru .
whom he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior , ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nalernia Nhiw Lululli mai ita totpena Nkar tioto ' memna la it ralamni , de lol Yesus Kristus mak kamori-kalewna ita hihi'ini-yapyapni .
that being justified by his grace , we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life . ||| Uplerlawna Nhi ' eda de totpa onnila Uplerlawna kalwiedni mai ita , pede Enetlia de , itakleh hala , ne itla ' emeka a'nani yanulu mak nhi'inde klernana re ' a-tniaru . Nhi ' it la a'nani pede itsa'ar it aranni la Uplerlawna de hota itler la mormiori-dardiari mak kodi liarni .
This saying is faithful , and concerning these things I desire that you insist confidently , so that those who have believed God may be careful to maintain good works . These things are good and profitable to men , ||| Lir di de lira plol toto ' a pede mpiesiaya . Ne la ' a wniatutmu de , omukot nohor reria hya ' maka a'ukota ri , totpena riy mak kpesiay Uplerlawna de , ralamni toto'ola , pa rwaleran la ' a hihi ' a-yapyap miak kalwiedweda . Yoma lir mak a'ukot oleka ri , de rodi unut la rimormiori honona .
but shun foolish questionings , genealogies , strife , and disputes about the law , for they are unprofitable and vain . ||| Ama , olie'tu la yahuri-yawo'ora mak edon kaplola , pa rawo'or nohora durti-waiti silsilah ne rkokna-rrarnia la ' a deulu-tatra agama . Hare honona de edon rodia unut la rimormior ita .
Avoid a factious man after a first and second warning , ||| Riy mak kwatutga wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak edon kaplola pa mak kariei pia krei upni-a'nani kni'ini-kniewarni , yoma rpesiay wniatutnu mak edon kaplola re , de ompuolliohora rde re'eni ida la'pa woru . Ne la'pa edon ratlin la lirmu , demade yana makpesiay rrehgorga pa ratlin la ir wniatutnu .
knowing that such a one is perverted and sinful , being self-condemned . ||| Yoma hota omuatga riy de nmeh ' a neka nhoitio'or doinia wniatutu-wniaye ' a plollola , pa nhi ' do ' a-nyap hiala . Riy de ntutga do'oni-halli yoma e nat niohora makaplola-makhala mere emkade ho'mana yeher to ' a pa do'oni-halli na'ititar rer lia .
When I send Artemas to you , or Tychicus , be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis , for I have determined to winter there . ||| Ama , hota agal Artemas , atia ' a de Tikhikus pa ntiy o ' a , demade mpualeran pa muplet pa mmuai a ' die la ' a leta Nikopolis , yoma a ' g e wuaror pa hota wuarin lia hande la ' a woki tah ' i muti lerni .
Send Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey speedily , that nothing may be lacking for them . ||| Mere la ' a Senas mak katga deulu-tatra de , me Apolsu , muhmuakur toto ' meman pa mura ' a-mupalga ir la ' a ya'ana-yemnu , lawra-raini totpena hota la'pa rarian la hande , de hare honona er olek la .
Let our people also learn to maintain good works to meet necessary needs , that they may not be unfruitful . ||| Makpesiay re hota rwaleran pa rhi ' a-ryapia hihi'ini-yapyapni mak kalwiedweda , de rala ra tu'tu rira kleheni-larni . La ' talan emkade , pede mormiorni-dardiarni re edon rla hamamuamua .
All who are with me greet you . Greet those who love us in faith . Grace be with you all . Amen . ||| Ama , agora it inni-narni honona mak kor a ' u mden wiutu er mak kwaka kalwieda la o ' a . Mtiulan pa mukot walia a kalwied mamni la riy mak ralamni nal ita , de it mutwualli mak itora pesiay ida . Ampak de Orgahi-Orha ' a pena Nala ra'ani-pallu tiy miy hononmi la hande . A kalwied mamni la miy , Paulus
Paul , a prisoner of Christ Jesus , and Timothy our brother , to Philemon , our beloved fellow worker , ||| Heiwia'lu Filemon ! Paulus a ' di mak katnioran la roma nhio'la ralamni yoma la ' a Kristus Yesus tulanni-kniarni , me it hyalli Timotius , amro ' a ama'enyatga horat di tiy heiwia'lu mak kden la a ralam mamni , mak kor am pia mkar wiutu ,
to the beloved Apphia , to Archippus our fellow soldier , and to the assembly in your house , ||| me la ' walia ita kreiwialli mak kahniopun rer lia ' rommu nayanni . Me ami edonna mhortaplin wualia it narni Aphia nor it heiwialli Arkhipus mak emekwali ami , pa emeka mak ka'ara ida , natu ntutulu-nlelewua nniahora-nniala ' a la ' Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni .
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Ampak de Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de , nora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus , pena ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu me kalwieda-paitiota tiy miy .
I thank my God always , making mention of you in my prayers , ||| Heiwia'lu Filemon , la ' a sniumbainu lelera-melmel de a ' u'uli-uwed reri Uplerlawna mak akola tieru-gawur nehla de .
hearing of your love and of the faith which you have toward the Lord Jesus and toward all the saints , ||| Yoma la ' a yatli'nu de , o ' e muhmuakur toto ' la pesiaymu la Itmatromlawanni Yesus , ne muatu mtiulla-msiayn walia mutlialawna mak kla ' olek la Uplerlawna mutnu .
that the fellowship of your faith may become effective in the knowledge of every good thing which is in us in Christ Jesus . ||| Awuak la Uplerlawna totpena onnila o pesiaymu la ' Yesus me la ' walia omnia'erit nan memna it rurni-laini ra'ani-pallu re honona mak Uplerlawna Nara ' a-napalga mai ita , pede hota omuora makpesiay re yeher to ' pa mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida . La ' talan emkade pede Uplerlawna Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi la makpesiay E ' a .
For we have much joy and comfort in your love , because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you , brother . ||| Heiwia'lu Filemon , la ' a yara'amu-yapalmu la mutlialawna mak kler olek la Uplerlawna mutnu pepanni-taurnu ralamni re de , nrei a lia hepur lawna ne nod wiali a ' pua a hmuakru naruri owa'an la genni , yoma la ' o hihi'imu-yapyapmu mak kareiniande riy mak kler olek la Uplerlawna limni ralamni rahepur wenna .
Therefore though I have all boldness in Christ to command you that which is appropriate , yet for love 's sake I rather appeal to you , being such a one as Paul , the aged , but also a prisoner of Jesus Christ . ||| Heiwia'lu , agatga de onnila a ' di de maka Yesus Nhopan pa godia Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni , de agodi plolli pa aghopna heiwia'lu nhi ' a hya ' maka hota mhi ' a . Mere emkade ho'mana onnila ' mtiulla-msiayni la mutlialawna makpesiay re pede awuak to ' tiy o ' a . Awuak lilili-mamuau tiy o ' a , totpa mrieiniana-mua'nana a li'ru di . A ' di de hamtoto ' olek a ' u ne mumkek memna de a ' g ed ma'ta la roma nhio'la ralamni onnila Kristus Yesus lirni-tunnu .
I appeal to you for my child Onesimus , whom I have become the father of in my chains , ||| Heiwia'lu , ukota ralma-rio'ru di tiy o ' a la ' a a'nu . Meman neka la e ' de a a'nu raralma atia ' a mere la roma nhio'la ralamni di a ' g ed maka ukot nohora mormiori-dardiari warwuaru la e ' a , ne dodo'ondi npesiay walia pede enhi ' a a'nu la it pesiayni di . Muat niohora olek e ' wali yoma nanni de Onisimus maka nnia'eratni de nperkuna .
who once was useless to you , but now is useful to you and to me . ||| Ululu omuora atmu Onisimus di mdien wut die , edon nodia unut tiy o ' a . Mere la ' lera-mela ri , de hota edon nodia unut la o ' mueh ' a , mere hota nperkun matmiat mai itro ' a .
I am sending him back . Therefore receive him , that is , my own heart , ||| La'pa dodo'ondi de Onisimus di maka a ralmu nal de , de aghopan pa nawalia owa'an tiy o ' a .
whom I desired to keep with me , that on your behalf he might serve me in my chains for the Good News . ||| La ' a wniareknu de agiwa ultarga totpena nwaug o ' a pa nhi'inde nhima-nre ' a lia ' a a knia'ru di , la ler mak adien ma'ta la roma nhio'la ralamni onnila a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni .
But I was willing to do nothing without your consent , that your goodness would not be as of necessity , but of free will . ||| Mere a ' g edonna get mia'ta la hadomdoma , yoma heiwia'lu edonna nakot ma'ta ralma-riorni . Awuak lilili-mamuau tiy o ' a , totpena mueh ' a mhuria ralammu ne yana atiekga o ' a .
For perhaps he was therefore separated from you for a while that you would have him forever , ||| Mere yanpa Uplerlawna Nolin doinia Onisimus olieta-patoga tiy o ' di , de , edonna nodia la wenu-wolla , totpena npesiay Itmatromni Yesus pa hota omual owa'an e ' a pa la'pa mmuati-mmuor niohora edon ntut tio'ola nohkeran di , mere la ' pa ntut mueman la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nodi liarni .
no longer as a slave , but more than a slave , a beloved brother-especially to me , but how much rather to you , both in the flesh and in the Lord . ||| Lera-mela de hota nwehwa-nlakat tiy o ' de edon emeka atmu-wa'armu to ' a mere hota wniehwani-liakatni tiy o ' de kalwiedni narehi owa'an la hade , yoma hota e ' de , de nor o ' pa mpia'ama-mpiahyal lia ' pesiay ida . E ' de nden nek la a ralmu ne meman neka la hota reriehenu pa o ralammu nal walia e ' a , emeka atmu-wa'armu me emekwalima riy mak kwa'ama-kwahyali , kwa'ina-kwanar la ' Itmatromlawanni .
If then you count me a partner , receive him as you would receive me . ||| La ' hade pede la'pa ompuarora heiwialmu a lia la ' it pesiayni , me kniar wialmu la Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni , de awuak de mrieinian owa'ana Onisimus pa emekwalia o e mrieinian a ' u .
But if he has wronged you at all or owes you anything , put that to my account . ||| Ne la'pa e nhala , onde e nhi ' nana otna-ar tiy o ' a , de pena a ' g ed maka khernu-kwauga tiy o ' a .
I , Paul , write this with my own hand , I will repay it not to mention to you that you owe to me even your own self besides . ||| La'pa emkade nek wa , ne amueh ' a kenia la handi , Paulus a orgah ' u hadi , pena hota aghernu-wuaga otna-ara re honona . Hota a ' g edonna wuahniort la ' a o ' nek de yanpa o ' e mu'otan mai a ' u . La ' a nnia'eratni de , o ' ed mak kwaka terima kasi lawlawan mai a ' u , yoma omlia ' oleka makpesiay .
Yes , brother , let me have joy from you in the Lord . Refresh my heart in the Lord . ||| Heiwia'lu awuak owa'an pa mtiultulan pa mrieiniana Onisimus . Mrieiniana a wakwa'ku di pa emeka twa'ina-twanara la Yesus Kristus loini-talanni , totpena hota la ' hihi'imu-yapyapmu de pa alier la ralma hepuepru onnila itla ' id la Yesus Kristus .
Having confidence in your obedience , I write to you , knowing that you will do even beyond what I say . ||| Aghi ' a horat di de a ralmu napranrana , yoma agatga de hota heiwia'lu nreiniana hya ' maka awuaka . Nareh wiali die , agatga de hota heiwia'lu nhi ' a de reh wial hade .
Also , prepare a guest room for me , for I hope that through your prayers I will be restored to you . ||| Ne awuak walia hadi tiy o ' a , de pena mtiulan pa muhgalia o rommu kamarni id mai a ' u , yoma agha'ar a arnu la Uplerlawna de hota la ' miy sniumbainmi re , ed mak kottiarg owa'an a lia miy hononmi .
Epaphras , my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus , greets you , ||| Epafras e nor a lia ' a roma nhio'la , yoma la ' a Kristus Yesus rerieini . E ' wal pia e nwak kalwieda tiy o ' a .
as do Mark , Aristarchus , Demas , and Luke , my fellow workers . ||| Me a kniarwia'lu Markus , Aristarkus , Demas , me Lukas e ra'enyat wut lir kalwiedni tiy o ' a .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit . Amen . ||| A honon ampak de Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Nala ra'ani-pallu nanaloi-nanatar nan miy . A honon kalwied mamni , Paulus
God , having in the past spoken to the fathers through the prophets at many times and in various ways , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' ululu ma'ta de Uplerlawna Naltier rer lia it upni-tgarni de Nlola makwohorulu-ktatrulu . La ' ler meni na'nama Uplerlawna Naltier lia makwohorulu-ktatrulu re , Nala deulu-tatra onde ler dom de Nala nnio'oni , ler dom de hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mujizat la'pa dom to ' owa'ana .
has at the end of these days spoken to us by his Son , whom he appointed heir of all things , through whom also he made the worlds . ||| Mere la'pa ntut lia lera-mela ri mak hota kod lia noha niatni , de Enaltier mai ita de Nlol nohor neka E A'nani . La ' A'nani de pede Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayapi nohkerna-rai miaran di honona . Ne Uplerlawna Nakot targa de hota A'nani de ed mak kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu .
His Son is the radiance of his glory , the very image of his substance , and upholding all things by the word of his power , who , when he had by himself purified us of our sins , sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high , ||| Me E ' mana ed maka ktut niana Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni , tutullu-lolo'oni la'pa liplipa-kamka'mani la ' a Ilwo'itu-Darwionema . E ' ed maka ktolliohora klernohora Uplerlawna nhiolli-lietni illu-wniehwani honona . E ' ed maka kariwa-kahaiya noh maran di nora mniotni honona de Nnairia lirni-tunnu mak kodi plolli-mneheni . E ' ed mak kamou-kawitna rimormiori la do'oni-halli na'nama Nla ' Enamtatna la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu walli malganna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha totpena Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi .
having become as much better than the angels as the more excellent name he has inherited is better than theirs . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' a A'na de ed maka klernana liwangen tiutul die , pede hota Enareh dioinia Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat honona . Pede emeknekama E genni-tienni maka Uplerlawna Nala la de , de nareh mieman la Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu re genni-tienni .
For to which of the angels did he say at any time , You are my Son . Today I have become your father ? and again , I will be to him a Father , and he will be to me a Son ? ||| Itat niohora hade , yoma Uplerlawna Niwra , A A'nu O ' a . La'pa ler di de A'ukota de Aghi ' Am tiy O ' a . Uplerlawna mana Nakota Niwra , A ' die de E Amni . E ' de A A'nu . Mere edon Nakot memna lir mak emkade la hopopna-lili'iru id wali . Mere Nakot nek hade la Yesus .
When he again brings in the firstborn into the world he says , Let all the angels of God worship him . ||| Ne la'pa Uplerlawna Nhopan doinia Wutmueha-Laimieh de pa Nerun la nohkerna-rai miaran di , E ' mana Niwra , A hopopnu-lili'iru miy hononmi , mriu ' pua miuh ' idma-mriama A A'nu lia'arni .
Of the angels he says , He makes his angels winds , and his servants a flame of fire . ||| Mere la ' Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu re de , Uplerlawna Nakot nohora Niwra , Aghopan doin A hopopnu-lili'iru rpa hota e rhima-rre ' a A ' die emeka anni mak kteni me ai mak kmori .
But of the Son he says , Your throne , O God , is forever and ever . The scepter of uprightness is the scepter of your Kingdom . ||| Mere la A'nani de de Uplerlawna Nakot la , Uplerlawnu ne , lodanmu-hairmu nawniau kdededa pa nodi liarni . Omtiorna-mriautu de nodi plola-mneha .
You have loved righteousness and hated iniquity , therefore God , your God , has anointed you with the oil of gladness above your fellows . ||| Rhi'ina-rella hya ' mak kaplola nden rer lia O ralammu , yoma O ' edonna Mkaw niana yatyatni . La ' hade pede Orgahi-Orha ' a O Uplerlawanmu , Nwaliri O ' a pa Omdiella tutullu-lolo'oni totpa rira ratota-rawaw O ' a , rahepru-rayak niohor O ' a . Genmu-tienmu de nareh dioinia mutwualmu re .
And , You , Lord , in the beginning , laid the foundation of the earth . The heavens are the works of your hands . ||| Uplerlawna Enakot walia la A'nani , O ' de Orgahi-Orha ' a O ' a . La ' a nomlerni la ' noha gergera-tatiah ' i ma'ta de O ' ed mak kakoki-kayapia noh maran di me O orgahamu ed maka khi ' nana lyanti .
They will perish , but you continue . They all will grow old like a garment does . ||| Hota hare honona re rmol wua , emeka raini mak kawnial wia , mere O ' di de Omdiella genmu .
You will roll them up like a mantle , and they will be changed , but you are the same . Your years wo n't fail . ||| Nohkerna-rai miaran di hota Omhi ' a pa rmolu wa emeknekama rain maka rti'ila pa edon rnairi owa'ana . Na'nama O ed mak kala warwuarnu ma Mhuerun doinia . Mere O ' edonna Mhuerun doinia oke ' eti . Me O mormiormu edonna la ntutu-la nte'ewa mere nodia pa la nodi liarni .
But which of the angels has he told at any time , Sit at my right hand , until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet ? ||| La A'nani nampena Uplerlawna Nakota Niwra , Muliwna Mumtatnu la A wa'lu malganna , la'pa A'utowar arwalmu re honona la lakmu nayanni . La'pa la Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikta id mana Uplerlawna edonna Nakot lir mak emkare .
Are n't they all serving spirits , sent out to do service for the sake of those who will inherit salvation ? ||| Pede hota itwarora de hya ' er Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikta rina ? Ir honona de nhiw maka khima-kre ' Uplerlawna , maka Enhopan pa rma rtulan la ' riy maka hota klernana mormiori-lewlewna .
Therefore we ought to pay greater attention to the things that were heard , lest perhaps we drift away . ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , hota yeher to ' pa ittorn apitga Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' yamori-yalewna maka tatlin olek de , totpena yana tsoitio'or doinia it pesiayni .
For if the word spoken through angels proved steadfast , and every transgression and disobedience received a just penalty , ||| Yoma itat niohora Musa deullu-tatarni maka Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat re rakot nohora la it upni-tgarni re , id mana edonna nhala pede hota rlernohora re . Ne la'pa la ' riy maka kpera-kdaitia edonna ratlina-ratailla de , hota rlernan memna niukmua mak edonna kpa'eini-kpahala .
how will we escape if we neglect so great a salvation-which at the first having been spoken through the Lord , was confirmed to us by those who heard , ||| Emkade walia yamori-yalewna maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nala de . La'pa it edon tsa'wu nana mormiori-lewlewna de mak karehia Musa deullu-tatarni , de nnia'eratni de itlawra niukum lawan de la it wawayanni . Yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus ed mak kala ' ul pua kakot nohora mormiori-lewlewan de ! Ne riy mak katlin ulu re rakot nohor oleka lir de plollolli mai ita .
God also testifying with them , both by signs and wonders , by various works of power , and by gifts of the Holy Spirit , according to his own will ? ||| Ne Uplerlawna Nre ' wal pia Nhi ' aplola riy maka kakot nohora mormiori-lewlewna lirni , yoma Nhi ' neka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona , mak ktutga Uplerlawna rurni-laini nhi'nande riy ema rtaplelleltarga . Ne Nhi ' aplol walia ir lirni mak kakot nohora mormiori-lewlewan de yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nhakra rurni-laini la makpesiay honona rlernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
For he did n't subject the world to come , of which we speak , to angels . ||| Ina-nara , twahaur nohora noh marna-rai miaran mak hota kmai die . La ' ler de Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikta atia ' a er maka Uplerlawna Nala pa rodi plolli la noha-rai die , mere Enala la rimormiori ita .
But one has somewhere testified , saying , What is man , that you think of him ? Or the son of man , that you care for him ? ||| Itat niohora hade yoma Puka id ralamni de enakot nohora niwra , Rimormiori die hya ' a de Uplerlawnu ne , pede Omiwra mhuoratreria ? Rimormiori pa nden la rimormiori , ne nihya'pa Mhilpai-muanatga e ' a ?
You made him a little lower than the angels . You crowned him with glory and honor . ||| La ' lera ho'ke'eni de hopopna-lili'iru rareh nian oke'ela rimormior die . Ne Omuala pa Namtatna la liwangeni-mtatangeni tiutulu maka ha ratota-rawawa totpena Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi .
You have put all things in subjection under his feet . For in that he subjected all things to him , he left nothing that is not subject to him . But now we do n't yet see all things subjected to him . ||| Ne la ' walia Omtiowar targa Omkienia hare honona la E lakni nayanni pa Enodi plolli la haneknek wawannu . Nah , la'pa riwra Uplerlawna ed mak khi ' a rimormior pa nodi plolli la haneknek wawannu , nnia'eratni de la ' a hya'-hya ' to ' mana er momuou lia rimormior limni ralamni . La ' hade ho'mana it edonna tamkek la dodo'ondi de rimormiori e nodi plolli la haneknek wawannu .
But we see him who has been made a little lower than the angels , Jesus , because of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor , that by the grace of God he should taste of death for everyone . ||| Mere hota itamkek memna , de lira re honona rtutu-rte'ewa la ' a Yesus mormiorni . La ' lera ho'ke'eni de hopopna-lili'iru rareh nian oke'ela E ' a la ' ler maka Enden ma'ta la nohkerna wawannu , mere la ' dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Nala pa Namtatan la liwangeni tutullu mak ha ratota-rawawa totpena Nlernan ya'uli-yawedi . Enler la ' gen die , onnila Enler olek la yamuki-yama'ala mak kod lia matmiati . Enmat lia it hononita do'oni-halli rerieini totpena hota la ' hade pede Uplerlawna Ntutga E ralam kalwiedni la ' rimormior it hononita .
For it became him , for whom are all things and through whom are all things , in bringing many children to glory , to make the author of their salvation perfect through sufferings . ||| Uplerlawna ed mak kakoki-kayapia hare honona . Ne hare honona er mak kariei pia Uplerlawna nanni ra'uli-rawedia . Pa hota plola la E wniarorni totpena Nhi ' a Yesus , mak khar tialla pa Nodi rimormior it la yamori-yalewna , pa nler la kropna-krieutu , liwliwra-kakaklu , yamuki-yama'ala . Totpena la ' Enlernan kropna-krieutu re pede Yesus Nla ' mak katu khima-kre ' rimormior ita , mak kakleha ruri-lai . Ne la ' talan de pede Nod riy harahu pa hota ror rewre'wa E la ' geni hitita-reprepra liplipa-kamka'ma .
For both he who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from one , for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brothers , ||| Yesus Namou-nawitna rimormior ita do'oni-halli . Pa hota E ' Maka Kamou-Kawitna , nor wutga it maka Ha Namou-nawitna , it rewre'wa pa Amni ida . La ' hade pede Yesus edonna Nmola-nma ' a la Niwra it di de , E inni-narni amni-hyalli .
saying , I will declare your name to my brothers . Among the congregation I will sing your praise . ||| Itat niohora hade yoma Yesus Nakot olek la Uplerlawna , Hota A'ukot nohor O ' la ' a A i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu . La ' a ira nhiopannu-pniepanni de , Awuahniar pa A ' u'uli-uwedi O ' a .
Again , I will put my trust in him . Again , Behold , here I am with the children whom God has given me . ||| Yesus Enakot walia Niwra , Hota Agha'ara A arnu la Uplerlawna . A ' g inhatti , Agor wutga upa-a'na maka Uplerlawna Nala mai A ' u .
Since then the children have shared in flesh and blood , he also himself in the same way partook of the same , that through death he might bring to nothing him who had the power of death , that is , the devil , ||| Yesus Nmeh ' a nek de Nwal lia rimormiori totpena emekwali ita . Mormiorni emkade totpena hota Enmati . Totpena la ' a E matmiatni de pede Enlernan talan pa Ntu'tu-nlewria hegana amlawanni mak kodi plolli la matmiati .
and might deliver all of them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage . ||| La ' talan emkade pede Enolin doin rimormiori it la yamta'ata la ' a matmiati mak kodi plolli la ' a it mormiorni-dardiarni di . Yoma yamta'ata la ' a matmiat die , de emolmolan nekama upa-matroma maka kwa'ata-kwa'ar ita la it mormiorni di ralamni .
For most certainly , he does n't give help to angels , but he gives help to the offspring of Abraham . ||| Pa hota ina-nara , nayamkek memna de Yesus edon Ntulan la Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat mere mak Ha Ntulan la , de it hononita , makla ' Abrahama duratni-waitni .
Therefore he was obligated in all things to be made like his brothers , that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God , to make atonement for the sins of the people . ||| Hade ed mak kariei pede Uplerlawna Nal Yesus pa Nwal lia rimormiori piede Nlernan totota-wudwiudi maka nhi'inde itlernan walia . Totpena la ' hade pede Enla ' walia makpolu-makwaka la Uplerlawna la it rerieini imam , de makpolu-makwaka tutullu mak kawe'ena-kamtemna setia , me mak ktulla-ksaynia rimormiori ita . Totpa hota , emekwalima makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna rhi'nande , de Entuwu-nhai it pa hota it do'oni-halli nawnie'er doin olek la .
For in that he himself has suffered being tempted , he is able to help those who are tempted . ||| Ne la ' yoma E nek de Nlernan walia yamuki-yama'ala me totota-wudwiudi , la ' hade pede E ' mana Natu Ntulan walia ita maka klernana totota-wudwiudi .
Therefore , holy brothers , partakers of a heavenly calling , consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession , Jesus , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mak Uplerlawna Nkamieh niana miy yoma mlia ' temn olek la ' a riy maka Uplerlawna Npol niana pa mlier la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , a'ukota pa mpiaror nohor teka Yesus dina ! Yoma E ' ed makodi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mai ita , me la ' walia Nhi ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini imam . E ' ed maka itpesiaya .
who was faithful to him who appointed him , as also Moses was in all his house . ||| Yesus di , e Ndenrer lia setia Uplerlawna mak ktutmuata-kewra ' E ' a , pa emekwalima Musa la ululu de nawe'ena-namtemna la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona pa emeknekama riy ida nawe'ena-namtemna la kniarni la upni-matromni romni .
For he has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses , because he who built the house has more honor than the house . ||| Mere Yesus di ed maka klernana nhiu'ru-nhielma , yatota-yawawa de narehia Musa emeknekama riy maka kariria roma ed maka klernana ya'uli-yawedi nhiu'ru-nhielma , de narehia rom maka ha narir die .
For every house is built by someone , but he who built all things is God . ||| Roma re honona , rimormiori er mak karia re , mere mak khi ' a haneknek wawannu de Uplerlawna orgahani Nmeh ' a .
Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a servant , for a testimony of those things which were afterward to be spoken , ||| Musa nawe'ena-namtemna pa nhima-nre ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , mere e genni-tienni de emekto'ama hopopna-lili'ir id neka mak khima-kre ' a la matromni romni . Ne Musa hihi'ini-yapyapni de ntut muemna hya ' mak hota Uplerlawna Nalharia la ' a tuw li'iru .
but Christ is faithful as a Son over his house . We are his house , if we hold fast our confidence and the glorying of our hope firm to the end . ||| Mere Yesus Kristus Narehia Musa , yoma Endenrer lia Uplerlawna pa emekneka a'na id mak kodi plolli la amni romni . Ne hota it di de er mak ha riwra Uplerlawna romni mniotni it irhatti , hornama yana itamta'at pa twalera mere itsa'ar rer mia't it ralamni la hya ' maka hota Uplerlawna Nala mai ita . Hade ed mak khi ' it pa tahepuepur nohora .
Therefore , even as the Holy Spirit says , Today if you will hear his voice , ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , mliernohora hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakota , Niwra , La'pa la ' a lera-mela ri , de miy e mitlin nana Uplerlawna lirni de
do n't harden your hearts as in the rebellion , in the day of the trial in the wilderness , ||| yan memmemna miy o'ta tehra pa emekneka upmi-tgarmi , la ' ler maka rta'aga Uplerlawna , yoma rmalawan pa rtut o'ta kpaunu la E ' a la wo'orletna-kawurloini .
where your fathers tested me and tried me , and saw my deeds for forty years . ||| La ' a wo'orletna-kawurloini de , miy upmi-tgarmi ramkek nana A hihi ' u-yapya'pu mak kamehi-kayona la anni terampwogat memna , mere emkade ho'mana rta'aga me rtot ma't A ' u yoma rhi ' ma'ta o'ta tehrani-ratlinnon keran mai A ' u !
Therefore I was displeased with that generation , and said , ‘ They always err in their heart , but they did n't know my ways . ' ||| La ' hade pede A'uwenan la ira pa A'ukota giwra ir ralamni rod rer mia'ta la dodo ' a-halala pede irakleh oleka tlina-tail la ' a A li'ru-tu'nu .
As I swore in my wrath , ‘ They will not enter into my rest . ' ||| A'uwenan pa Aliokra re giwra , Oi ! Hota miy edonna mliernana gen miaka A'ukot targ oleka la riy makpesiay totpa hota ror A ' pua mren ami la geni kalwie'du .
Beware , brothers , lest perhaps there might be in any one of you an evil heart of unbelief , in falling away from the living God , ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , mpiahniorta . Mitiak reria totpena yana riy dom la ' miy wokmi-le'emi ihranu-ralamni re rod rer ir la do ' a-hala pede rakleha pesiay nareiniande rawlar dioinia Uplerlawna , de la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a , mak kden pa nodi liarni !
but exhort one another day by day , so long as it is called today , lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin . ||| Mere hota lera-mela ri , de la ' ler maka ha riwra Lera yamori-yalewna inhatti , hota miy idma nhedu-ntehra reri ida totpena pesiaymi la ' a ga ' a . Totpena hota la ' hade pede riy id tiy miy miana edonna mliernohora lir wokmaru mak kodi miy lia do ' a-hala pa mtiutga o'ta tehra-tlinnona kpau lia Uplerlawna .
For we have become partakers of Christ , if we hold the beginning of our confidence firm to the end , ||| Yoma it di de tlernan hare honona maka Yesus Kristus Nhi ' nan de , hornama itatorrer pitpitga ita pesiayni maka itlernan oleka la mulaliaini de la'pa ntutu-nte'ela hohoni .
while it is said , Today if you will hear his voice , do n't harden your hearts , as in the rebellion . ||| Ina-nara , mhioratreria hya ' ed maka ha rakot targa la Puka ralamni , Niwra , La'pa mitlin nana Uplerlawna lirni la ' lera-mela ri , de yana mhi ' tehra ralamni pa mtiolliohora upmi-tgarmi , maka la ' ler ululu rhi ' tlinnon keranni-o'ta kpaunu lia Uplerlawna .
For who , when they heard , rebelled ? Was n't it all those who came out of Egypt led by Moses ? ||| He ' ed mak katlina Uplerlawna lirni , mere ratlinnon kerna-o'ta kpau ? De ir honona re , de riy maka Musa ha nalewna pa nodgiot ir la Mesir irhatti toh !
With whom was he displeased forty years ? Was n't it with those who sinned , whose bodies fell in the wilderness ? ||| Ne riy meni er maka Uplerlawna Nawenan la anni terampwogata deno ? Enawenan la ' a maka Musa nodia re mere rhi ' do ' a-hala , pede Nukum wenwenna ir la wo'orletna-kawurloini !
To whom did he swear that they would n't enter into his rest , but to those who were disobedient ? ||| La ' ler de Uplerlawna liokarni de emkadi , Oi ! Hota miy di edonna mliernan gen miaka A'ukot targ oleka la makpesiay , totpa hota ror A ' pua mtu ' u-mren am lia gen die ! Ne hota he ' ed mak Uplerlawna lirni ha ntai lia dino ? Maka Uplerlawna lirni ha ntaiya de , la ' riy maka katlinnon kerna-ka ' o'ta kpau lia Uplerlawna .
We see that they were n't able to enter in because of unbelief . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali mpiahniorta ! Yoma itat niohora memna , ir de edonna rlernan gen die , yoma ir rakleha pesiay lia Uplerlawna .
Let 's fear therefore , lest perhaps anyone of you should seem to have come short of a promise of entering into his rest . ||| Ina-nara miy , la ' lera-mela ri Uplerlawna nnio'oni de nden ma'ta . De la ' a nnio'oni maka Ha Niwra he ' to ' makpesiay E ' a de hota rler pa ror E ' pa rtu ' u-rrena la ' a kniarni . La ' hade pede ina-nara , erammi la ' temmi totpena yana riy id tiy miy miana edonna nler la tniu ' u-rien de maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru .
For indeed we have had good news preached to us , even as they also did , but the word they heard did n't profit them , because it was n't mixed with faith by those who heard . ||| Yoma ha rakot nohora mai ita Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni , pa emeka ha rakot nohora la it upni-tgarni la ' ler ululu . Mere nnio ' de edon nodi unut oke'ela ira , yoma ir edonna rpesiaya .
For we who have believed do enter into that rest , even as he has said , As I swore in my wrath , they will not enter into my rest , although the works were finished from the foundation of the world . ||| Mere it makpesiay nampena er maka kler la rien de . Rien de ed maka Uplerlawna Nakota la ' a mak edon kpesiay , Niwra , A ' g e uwenan pa Aliokra re hota ir edonna ror A ' pua mren wut lia ' geni ida . Uplerlawna lirni emkade mere Nwahi ' targ oleka tniu ' u-rien de la ' a riy makpesiay re , la ' a ler maka Ha Nakoki-nayapia nohkerna-rai miarna pa nhorwua .
For he has said this somewhere about the seventh day , God rested on the seventh day from all his works , ||| Itat niohora Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targ oleka tniu ' u-rien de , yoma la ' a Puka ralamni niwra , La ' a lera wo'itnu de Uplerlawna kniarni nhorwua pede Nrena .
and in this place again , They will not enter into my rest . ||| Mere mhioratreria Uplerlawna lirni , Niwra , Hota ir edonna ror A ' pua mren wut lia ' geni ida .
Seeing therefore it remains that some should enter into it , and they to whom the good news was preached before failed to enter in because of disobedience , ||| La ' hade nnia'eratni de riy hota rler la tniu ' u-rien de mere mak kala ' ul pua katlina Kot Kalwieda-Paitiot de , edonna rlernan gen die yoma rahmena ratlina-ratailla .
he again defines a certain day , today , saying through David so long a time afterward just as has been said , Today if you will hear his voice , do n't harden your hearts . ||| La ' hade pede Uplerlawna ed maka kwalir niana lera nnielu id owa'ana totpa riy rlernana rien de . Lera maka Ha Nwalir niana de , lera-mela ri honona maka ha rweta la , Lera Yamori-Yalewna inhatti . Yoma la'pa me'eta-anni rlardoin meman la Musa lerni de , Uplerlawna Nakot nohora ler de la ' a Daud pa nhorat targa la Pukni ralamni . Lirni de ed maka ukot nohor olek di . Niwra , La'pa mitlin nana Uplerlawna lirni la ' lera-mela ri , de yana miy ralam tehra .
For if Joshua had given them rest , he would not have spoken afterward of another day . ||| Ne la ' ler maka Yosua nodi Israel re la noha-rai Kana'an ralamni de , Israel re rler olek la riena , mere plol toto ' a riena inhatta maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru atia ' a hade . Yoma la'pa rien inhatta hade hya ' owa'ana ed mak kariei piede Uplerlawna Nakot owa'ana la ' a rien de la ' ler li'iru maka ntu'tu-nte ' olek la Daud lerni ? !
There remains therefore a Sabbath rest for the people of God . ||| Pede ina-nara , nayamkek meman de Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targ oleka riena totpa mak kla ' E mutnu-rahanu ror E ' pa rren rewre'wa , pa emekwalima Uplerlawna mana Nren wal lia ' lera wo'itnu de .
For he who has entered into his rest has himself also rested from his works , as God did from his . ||| Yoma riy mak kler la riena , maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa de , de hota nren wal lia ' e kniarni honona pa emekwalima Uplerlawna Nhi ' a la ' Ha Na'ohi-na'ara nohkerna-rai miaran di pa nhoru .
Let 's therefore give diligence to enter into that rest , lest anyone fall after the same example of disobedience . ||| Hade pede mai pia tal ralam tetema pa tler la tniu ' u-riena maka Ha Nano'taru inhatta de . Yanhi'pa it doma tler la klieratni pa ittuini , yoma itlernohora mak kahmena katlina-katailla Uplerlawna la ' ler ululu de nhiolli-lietni .
For the word of God is living and active , and sharper than any two-edged sword , piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit , of both joints and marrow , and is able to discern the thoughts and intentions of the heart . ||| Hota twaleran pa tlernohora Uplerlawna lirni , yoma Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de ha naruri-na'orta pa emolmolan neka wehla ara , mak kaplokar la to'orni-gaini . Lir de emeknekama wehla ar maka nuh ' a la arna nora nhiwa rieiwiutnu la'pa nodi liarni la ' a ruri toptopa me kriahlu yoma Uplerlawna Nawerta-nataili rimormiori wniarorni-wnialaini mak kayade ' a .
There is no creature that is hidden from his sight , but all things are naked and laid open before the eyes of him to whom we must give an account . ||| Rimormiori id mana edonna nayade'ela Uplerlawna matni yamkekni . Haneknek wawannu de emeka halyehwa pa nayamkek momuou lia E gaini ralamni . Ne it mana hota twalol nohor ploini-ple'erni la ' hare honona maka itsi ' a-tyapia la ' a E ' a .
Having then a great high priest who has passed through the heavens , Jesus , the Son of God , let 's hold tightly to our confession . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Yesus de , Uplerlawna A'nani inhatta , ed mak khi ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini imam . Ne E ' ed mak kler olek la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Nwak it la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni . La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , hota itatorreri apitga hya ' ed maka itwayow nohor pa tpesiaya oleka de .
For we do n't have a high priest who ca n't be touched with the feeling of our infirmities , but one who has been in all points tempted like we are , yet without sin . ||| Yoma Yesus , makhi ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini Natu Ntulla-nsayn meman nohora ita mak kler la do ' a-hala ralamni onnila takleha ruri-lai . Enat niohora Ntulan la ita yoma la ' ler maka Enden rer lia nohkeran di wawannu de Enler walia la norniori-tamtama , yapi ' u-yaga ' u , pa emekwali ita . Mere la ' E ' de edonna Nhi ' do ' a-nyap hiala .
Let 's therefore draw near with boldness to the throne of grace , that we may receive mercy and may find grace for help in time of need . ||| La ' hade pede yana tamta'ata . Mere mai pia tla tora Uplerlawna mak ktorna-krautu , mak kal reria E ralam kalwiedni , de twatrom rer lia kniola tieru-niawur nehla . Totpena la'pa itler la totota-wudwiudi onde kropna-krieutu de hota Uplerlawna Ntutga sniayanni mai ita me Ntulan la ita .
For every high priest , being taken from among men , is appointed for men in things pertaining to God , that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins . ||| Ina-nara , hota itakot nohora yala'ani la ' a makla ' o'ta-mata la makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la Yahudi re rerieini . Riwra rrana makla ' o'ta-mat de , rwaliri rimormiori ida noma rrana totpa kniarni de , de npolu-nwak la Uplerlawna onnila rimormiori re rerieini . Enla ' makpolu-makwak la de totpa na'ala rimormiori prehenni-maunu la'pa nhioini-tnianni pa nla Nala la Uplerlawna totpa Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna ir do'oni-halli .
The high priest can deal gently with those who are ignorant and going astray , because he himself is also surrounded with weakness . ||| Ne rimormiori mak kla ' o'ta la makpolu-makwak la de nakleh walia ruri-lai . La ' hade pede la ' a kniar die natu nhu'ru-nhelam la ' a riy mak kler la klieratni yoma e raplinu-raplo ' nohora pesiayni yala'ani onde yoma rakleha ruri-lai .
Because of this , he must offer sacrifices for sins for the people , as well as for himself . ||| Ne yoma e ' nek de nakleh ruri-lai pia nhi'inde nler walia do ' a-hala ralamni wali , pede e ' edonna nal to ' a rira nhioini-tnianni onnila ir do'oni-halli mere e nek de nal walia nhioini-tnianni la ' a e do ' a-hal wamueheni .
Nobody takes this honor on himself , but he is called by God , just like Aaron was . ||| Ne la ' riy id mana , edonna nwaliria inon wamueheni pa nhi ' o'ta-mat la makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la rimormiori rerieini . Mere riy mak la ' a makpolu-makwak la de , de Uplerlawna ed mak kpolg hade . Hade emekwalima la ' a Harun la ' ler ululu .
So also Christ did n't glorify himself to be made a high priest , but it was he who said to him , You are my Son . Today I have become your father . ||| Pa hota Yesus Kristus mana hota emkade wali . E ' edonna Nmeh ' a pa Nran inonni pa Nhi ' a o'tani la makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna , totpena Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi , nhiormata-knianala , ya'unni-yamta'ata . Mere Uplerlawna ed mak kran E ' a . Yoma Uplerlawna Nakot la , A A'nu O ' a . La ' ler di de Atiutga de A ' g ed mak khi ' Am la O ' a .
As he says also in another place , You are a priest forever , after the order of Melchizedek . ||| La Puka lirni dom de Uplerlawna Enakot nohora la ' hade wali , de emkadilla , O ' di de makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la rimormiori rerieini pa nodi liarni , emekwalima Melkisedek makla ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la ' ululu de .
He , in the days of his flesh , having offered up prayers and petitions with strong crying and tears to him who was able to save him from death , and having been heard for his godly fear , ||| Ne Yesus mana la'pa Enmormior lia ' nohkeran di , de Ensumbain de Nko ' a-nkakru , Npolu-nhaunu la Uplerlawna yoma Uplerlawna nanpena ed mak kodi plolli pa Namori-nalewna Yesus la ' a matmiati ralamni . Yoma E ' de Nhu'ru-nhelam la Uplerlawna , pede Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana E lirni .
though he was a Son , yet learned obedience by the things which he suffered . ||| Yesus de Uplerlawna A'nani inhatta ! Mere emkade ho'mana , Enwatut lia yatlina-yataili la Uplerlawna la'pa Enlernana yamola-yama ' a , nniahora-nniala ' a , yamuki-yama'ala la ' a mormiorni ralamni nodia pa la'pa nmati .
Having been made perfect , he became to all of those who obey him the author of eternal salvation , ||| Ne la ' talan emkade pede Enhi ' mak kat niohora memna talla mak kaplol pa Nwak la Uplerlawna la rimormior rerieini . Noma Yesus Nal mormiori-lewlewna plalahwa pa nodi liarni la ' a riy mak katu katlina-katailla E ' a .
named by God a high priest after the order of Melchizedek . ||| Ne Uplerlawna mana Ntutmuata-nkewra ' E ' pa Nhi ' o'ta-mat la makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la rimormiori rerieini pa emekwalima ray Melkisedek la ' ler ululu .
About him we have many words to say , and hard to interpret , seeing you have become dull of hearing . ||| La'pa rakot nohora Yesus nor Melkisedek genni-tienni la ' a makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna , de hadi nnia'eratni harahu maka amiwa makot nohora tiy miy , mere hota amakota hya ' a ? Yoma la ' lera-mela ri de yeher to ' pa miy nhioratmi lolioi rehi pede hota miy edonna mnia'erit nana .
For although by this time you should be teachers , you again need to have someone teach you the rudiments of the first principles of the revelations of God . You have come to need milk , and not solid food . ||| Plollolli de nte ' olek la lerni pa mhi ' tungkuru , mere tamkek la miy di , de miplin mua'ta liawanni pa nhi'nande riy meheni mana e rwatutu ma'ta miy lia Uplerlawna wniatutnu-wniaye'eni onni-ga'arni maka ha rakot nohora nhioitio'ora-tniahnei dioinia do ' a-hala ralamni me Uplerlawna Ntorna watghudi la ler hohoni . Pa hota hya ' a maka ha rwatutu-rwaye ' a la miy die emeknekama uh tiuru maka papay remun ma'ta yoma raplinu ra'ana-remun ma'ta ya'ana-yemun tertehra .
For everyone who lives on milk is not experienced in the word of righteousness , for he is a baby . ||| Yoma riy mak klernan mamainia Uplerlawna wniatutnu-wniaye'eni onni-ga'arni onnila ir emeknekama papay la ' a pesiayni , de nakleh ma'ta ralma-rior la makhala-makaplola .
But solid food is for those who are full grown , who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern good and evil . ||| Mere wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kakot nohora ita nhiolli-lietni mak kaplola mak khi ' aruri it pesiayni la ga ' a , de emeknekama ya'ana-yemnu tertehra , maka ina-ama gahani . Riy makla ' ina-ama la ' a pesiay nampena er maka kat niohora makhala-makaplola yoma nhi'inde rwatutu-rwaye ' reri inon wamueheni la ' hya ' ed maka plola , totpena rtolliohor reria pa rtutga la mormiorni ralamni .
Therefore leaving the teaching of the first principles of Christ , let 's press on to perfection-not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works , of faith toward God , ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , yana itwatut mamaini wniatutu-wniaye ' a onni-ga'arni la ' a Yesus Kristus . Mere la ' pa itwatut wal lia hya ' ed mak khi ' aruri it pesiayni pa nla ' ga ' a . Yana tden rer niek la wniatutu onni-ga'arni mak ha rakot nohora nhioitio'or-tniahnei dioinia do ' a-hala ralamni mak hota kodia riy pa rler la matmiati ralamni , me wniatutu mak ha rakot nohor neka riy pesiayni la Uplerlawna . Meman nek la wniatutu samomuou walia hade mere mai pia itwahaka wniatutu-wniaye ' a maka kodi riy pesiayni la ga ' a .
of the teaching of baptisms , of laying on of hands , of resurrection of the dead , and of eternal judgment . ||| Yana tden rer lia wniatutu la ' a rwuri-rohma me rharani la'pa rran lim la riy wawannu , onde la'pa rimormiori rmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni de Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni-tatiaili lahannu niukum lawna , pa wniahlani re hota nodi liarni .
This will we do , if God permits . ||| Mere , mai pia plet pa twaleran totpa it pesiayni la ' a ga ' a hornama Uplerlawna Nal talan mai ita .
For concerning those who were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly gift , and were made partakers of the Holy Spirit , ||| Yoma riy mak pesiayni edon kler la ga ' a mere rwayow pa rhoitio'ora-rtahnei dioin la Yesus Kristus Kot Kalwiedni , ta'en niana rod owa'an ir pa rhoitio'or doin-rtahnei dioinia owa'an la do'oni-halli . La ululu de , irden olek la Uplerlawna lelerni ralamni ne rlernan walia E ra'ani-pallu . Ir mana rlernan walia Uplerlawna Nhiwni .
and tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come , ||| Ir rat niohora la ' a ira mormiorni de , Uplerlawna lirni de samoga . Ne ir mana ramkek oleka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak kwatiawu Uplerlawna plolli . Hota Uplerlawna Ntutga plolli-mneheni de la ' a tuwu mak hota kmai nieka .
and then fell away , it is impossible to renew them again to repentance , seeing they crucify the Son of God for themselves again , and put him to open shame . ||| Mere rwayow pa rhoitio'ora-rtahnei Yesus Kristus de ! Hota ta'en niana ir rhoitio'or doin-rtahnei dioinia owa'an la do'oni-halli . Yoma emeknekama ir rkeni owa'an Uplerlawna A'nani la auwlakra , me rhi ' a pa Enlernana yapolu-yaliella la ' a mutlialawna gaini . Hihi'ini-yapyapni de hota nodi ir la klierat lawna .
For the land which has drunk the rain that comes often on it and produces a crop suitable for them for whose sake it is also tilled , receives blessing from God , ||| Itamkek nohor tek la umpamni ! Riy maka kat niohor oleka Uplerlawna hihi ' a-yapyap kalwiedwedni re honona la ' a ira pede e rhi ' nana hya ' mak kla ' nan E ralamni , de E ' ed maka ktera-kdem ira . Ir emolmolan nekama tani maka kdihmia ger otna maka nhi'inde otna ha ntur mamain la wawannu , dewade yawuli-yatniamni rmor lia wawannu totpena ora nhyi ' de na'an lola-nemun lola .
but if it bears thorns and thistles , it is rejected and near being cursed , whose end is to be burned . ||| Mere mak khoitio'or la Uplerlawna de emolmolan nekama tan miaka kdihmia otna maka ha ntur mamain la wawannu pa namor nieka du'uta-penta , wewnihi la'pa rururni-karkiaratni pa rmori . Hota ir emolmolan nekama tan miak edonna rperkun wa , pa hota Uplerlawna ed maka Nukmua . La ' hohoni de rhokla ai pa ai na'an amutni-aki'ira .
But , beloved , we are persuaded of better things for you , and things that accompany salvation , even though we speak like this . ||| Mere ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden rer lia a ralmu , la'pa amakot emkade ho'mana , ami e mpesiay mia'ta miy . Ampesiay die hota miy edon mhi ' emkade , mere hota miy mhi ' nana hya ' mak kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni pa emeknekama riy maka ha ramori-ralewn oleka wa .
For God is not unrighteous , so as to forget your work and the labor of love which you showed toward his name , in that you served the saints , and still do serve them . ||| Uplerlawan de , Uplerlawna maka kodi rhi'ina-rella plola-mneha etla E ' a . Hota E ' mana edonna Nhortaplinga miy prehenmi-maumi mulli-pe'elmi la ' a E kniar ralamni . Ne Nhoratrer mia'ta miy ralam kalwiedmi maka ha mtiutga la E ' a , la ' a mira ' a-mipalga , mhima-mre ' a miy pesiay wialmi la ululu me la'pa dodo'ondi wali .
We desire that each one of you may show the same diligence to the fullness of hope even to the end , ||| Mere ampak memna la ' miy hononmi totpa rima-rima mdien rer lia ralam kalwiedni pa la'pa nhoru , totpena hota miatu mueman de hota mliernana hya ' ed mak ha mpiahaka , mak Uplerlawna Nano'targ oleka tiy miy .
that you wo n't be sluggish , but imitators of those who through faith and perseverance inherited the promises . ||| Ampak de totpena yana miapuhuna-miaprai lia ' pesiaymi . Mere totpena la ' a mormiormi ralamni de , miy pesiaymi naruri me mpiei-mniar reria Uplerlawna maimiaini . Totpa hota emeknekama mliernohora riy makpesiay la ' ululu , maka onnila pesiayni re raruri me rden rer lia wniei la Uplerlawna pede hota rlernana hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la ira .
For when God made a promise to Abraham , since he could swear by no one greater , he swore by himself , ||| Ina-nara , tsoratreria la Abraham lerni . La ' lerni de Uplerlawna Nano'targa Abrahama , de Enlokar nohora , totpa Nhi ' aruri owa'an maka Ha Nakot taru re . Yoma hadoma edonna narehia Uplerlawna , pede Enlokar de Nwet la E orgahani nanni .
saying , Surely blessing I will bless you , and multiplying I will multiply you . ||| Niwra , A orgah ' u uno'targa de hota A ' g ed mak ktera-kdema , me Aghi ' o duratmu-waitmu pa rwal lia riy mutlialawna .
Thus , having patiently endured , he obtained the promise . ||| Ne la'pa Abraham nwei-nnara hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar lia e ' de , plola pa ha nlernana hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru die .
For men indeed swear by a greater one , and in every dispute of theirs the oath is final for confirmation . ||| Nhi'inde riy rlokra , de rwet la mak katulu-karehi nanni , totpena riy rat niohora de plol toto ' pa ha nhi ' nan hya ' ed mak ha nakot targa de , de riy id mana edon rawo'or nohora .
In this way God , being determined to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel , interposed with an oath , ||| Hota emkade walia Uplerlawna . Eniwra Nhi ' aruri owa'an E nnio'oni totpa riy maka hota kreiniana-ka'nana E nnio'oni , de rat niohora E nnio'oni de hota E ' edonna Nhernu-nwau dioinia oke ' et lia . La ' hade pede Ena'itr owa'an liokra la ' a E nnio'oni de .
that by two immutable things , in which it is impossible for God to lie , we may have a strong encouragement , who have fled for refuge to take hold of the hope set before us . ||| Uplerlawna taken niana Nkei nnio'oni , me la'pa liokarni ho'mana edonna . Ha maroro ' a re edon rherun doin oke ' et lia . La ' hade pede Uplerlawna Nala nnio'oni me liokarni de mai ita , mak itsa'ar it aranni la E ' a , totpena hota yeher to ' pa tarur pia tatorreria ita nhia'argenni de , la ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'targ oleka mai ita .
This hope we have as an anchor of the soul , a hope both sure and steadfast and entering into that which is within the veil , ||| Ita nhia'argenni di naruri-na'orta pa emolmolan nekama watgorniha maka kaniohor apitu la ' lai wikwikni , me emekwalia tniorreria pitpitu , yoma itat niohora de hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' memna hya ' ed maka Ha Nakot targ oleka . La ' a nhia'argen die , pede emolmolan nekama tler olek la Uplerlawna genni la ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa emekwalima o'ta-mat la makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna de rler meman la gen lululi la kok lawna to'orni la Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni .
where as a forerunner Jesus entered for us , having become a high priest forever after the order of Melchizedek . ||| Yesus Nhar tiarga talla mai ita , yoma Enla ' olek pa Nhi ' a o'ta-mat la makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini . Ne hota Enhi ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la'pa nodi liarni , pa hota emekwalima Melkisedek la ' ler ululu de .
For this Melchizedek , king of Salem , priest of God Most High , who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him , ||| Ina-nara , twahaur nohor Melkisedek la ' ler ululu . E ' de ed makla ' ray lia leta Salem me nla ' walia makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu makden la tutullu-lolo'oni , la ' a rimormiori rerieini de imam . La ' ler ululu maka Abraham nora ray-ray ra'ar pa ray re rla ' yawa noma Melkisedek nmai pia nwatroma Abraham noma Melkisedek nwak la Uplerlawna pa Ntera-ndema Abraham .
to whom also Abraham divided a tenth part of all being first , by interpretation , king of righteousness , and then also king of Salem , which means king of peace , ||| La ' noma Abraham mana nala nhiakra ida la termid ralamni sepersepuluh la ' a hya ' maka Abraham na'unut nana la ar ralma de pa nala la ' a Melkisedek . Ne Melkisedek nnia'eratni id de , Ray rhi'ina-rella adil , ne yoma e ' de ray miak kwatiawua Salem pede nanni nnia'eratni id wal die Ray mak kodia kalwieda-paitiota , yoma Salem nnia'eratni de kalwieda-paitiota .
without father , without mother , without genealogy , having neither beginning of days nor end of life , but made like the Son of God , remains a priest continually . ||| Rwahaur la Melkisedek di , de raplin niohora inni-amni onde upni-tgarni ha rlolola me edonna rwahaur nohor walia la ' a hya ' wolla maka Melkisedek di rmoria la noha wawannu , la ' walia ha matmiatni de hya ' lera-hya ' wolla . Pede emeknekama E ' de makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la rimormiori rerieini maka kodi liarni pa la nhoru pa emeknekama Uplerlawna A'nani .
Now consider how great this man was , to whom even Abraham the patriarch gave a tenth out of the best plunder . ||| Mpiaror teka , de Melkisedek di de riy lalawna id hadi . Itat niohora hade yoma Abraham , it upni-tgarni maka rwetwet la nanni nek de nala nhiakra ida la ' a nhiakra termida ralamni sepersepuluh la ' a hya'-hya ' maka ha na'unut nana la ar ralma .
They indeed of the sons of Levi who receive the priest 's office have a commandment to take tithes from the people according to the law , that is , of their brothers , though these have come out of the body of Abraham , ||| La ' a deulu-tatra agama Yahudi , de Musa nakot targa niwra , Makpolu-makwaka imam la Lewi duratni-waitni , de er mak kawoka patuini-paro'ona la ' a mutu Israel prehenni-maunu enni , la ' a nhiakra id la nhiakra termida ralamni sepersepuluh la ' ir inni-narni amni-hyalli re owa'ana , kennama ir rewre'wa pa Abraham duratni-waitni ir honona .
but he whose genealogy is not counted from them has accepted tithes from Abraham , and has blessed him who has the promises . ||| Mere Melkisedek de Lewi duratni-waitni atia ' hade mere enlernana nhiakra id la ' a nhiakra termid ralamni la ' a hya ' a-hya ' maka Abrahama ha na'unut nana la ' a ar ralma . Ne nwak la Uplerlawna pa Ntera-ndema Abraham . Melkisedek de nwak pa Uplerlawna Ntera-ndem Abrahama maka la ' ler ululu nlernan oleka Uplerlawna nnio'oni .
But without any dispute the lesser is blessed by the greater . ||| Plollolli de mak ktera-kdema rira ha narehelia mak ha ntera-ndema .
Here people who die receive tithes , but there one receives tithes of whom it is testified that he lives . ||| Ne la'pa Lewi duratni-waitni makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna imam rlernana durmu-nhiakra la patuini-paro'ona de hota ha rmat wiali . Mere la ' a Puka ralamni de Uplerlawna Nakot nohora Melkisedek de emeknekama enmormior pia nodi liarni .
We can say that through Abraham even Levi , who receives tithes , has paid tithes , ||| Ne itwahaur nohor owa'ana de Lewi duratni-waitni maka nhi'inde kawoka patuini-paro'onni la ' a riy Israel re , de emeknekama ror rewre'wa Abraham pa e rpair wali nhiakar de la Melkisedek la ' ler ululu de .
for he was yet in the body of his father when Melchizedek met him . ||| Yoma la ' ler maka Abrahama nala nhiakar de la ' Melkisedek , de Lewi nora duratni-waitni edonna rayor nian mia'ta , mere yoma Abraham duratni-waitni ira pede emeknekama ror rewre'wa Abraham rala nhiakar de la ' Melkisedek .
Now if perfection was through the Levitical priesthood for under it the people have received the law , what further need was there for another priest to arise after the order of Melchizedek , and not be called after the order of Aaron ? ||| Nah , Lewi duratni-waitni makla ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la Yahudi re rerieini er mak ktorna Yahudi agama deullu-tatarni . Mere la'pa plollolli pa irodi plolli pa rhi ' nan hare honona maka Uplerlawna Nwaror targa de , hota hya ' owa'an ed mak kariei piede Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna id owa'an pa Nmai , maka Lewi nora Harun duratni-waitni atia ' E ' a ? ! Mere E ' de emolmolan nekama Melkisedek .
For the priesthood being changed , there is of necessity a change made also in the law . ||| Me la'pa makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna mtatangenni de nhierannu-wniaunu de hota rherun doinia , agama deullu-tatarni mana rherun doin walia .
For he of whom these things are said belongs to another tribe , from which no one has officiated at the altar . ||| Itat niohor agama deullu-tatarni rherun doinia yoma maka Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a de , Lewi duratni-waitni atia ' E ' a . Ha Nwatiawua durti-waiti dom to ' a , ne agama deullu-tatarni edonna nakot nohor ma'ta riy id la E luwnu-a'nani duratni-waitni pa rrana E la ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna totpa nala nhioi-tniani la katri'ana wawannu .
For it is evident that our Lord has sprung out of Judah , about which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood . ||| Yoma Itmatromlawanni inhatta ed mak kla ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawan de la it rerieini . Ne riy honona rat wualia , la ' a Itmatromlawanni de Nwatiawua luwu-a'na Yehuda . Ne Musa edonna nwet tar lia luwu-a'na Yehuda re pa rla ' a makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna .
This is yet more abundantly evident , if after the likeness of Melchizedek there arises another priest , ||| La'pa Itmatromlawanni Enmai pia Nhi ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna pa emolmolla Melkisedek la ' ler ululu de , de nayamkek memna la ' a hya ' ed maka ha rakota la ' a agama deullu-tatarni rherni oleka wa .
who has been made , not after the law of a fleshly commandment , but after the power of an endless life , ||| Rran Itmatromlawanni pa Nla ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna , de edonna rnairia deulu-tatra maka rimormiori ha rhi ' nana yoma iramkek nek la rimormiori upni-tgarni , mere ramkek la Itmatromlawanni plolli-mneheni pa Namori-nalewna yoma E ' ed mak kden pa nodi liarni .
for it is testified , You are a priest forever , according to the order of Melchizedek . ||| Yoma hota emeknekama hya ' ed mak ha rhorat targa la ' Puka ralamni de niwra , O ' di de makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna id O ' a , pa nodi liarni , emekwalima Melkisedek makla ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna .
For there is an annulling of a foregoing commandment because of its weakness and uselessness ||| Rakot emkade yoma la ' dodo'ondi de deulu-tatra ululu mana treiya la ' walli , yoma nakleh oleka nhiapargen wia pa rhapar lola .
for the law made nothing perfect , and a bringing in of a better hope , through which we draw near to God . ||| Yoma deulu-tatra agama Yahudi , edonna nhi ' nana ha kuku id et pia nod it pa tor Uplerlawna tkalwieda . Mere dodo'ondi de itlernana nhia'argenia warwuaru ida la ' a Yesus , mak karehi-kalawan la ulul gahani de , totpena twakrian reria Uplerlawna .
Inasmuch as he was not made priest without the taking of an oath ||| Ne ina-nara , itat niohor walia , de Yesus kniarni la ' a Npolu-nwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini , de narehia Lewi duratni-waitni kniarni yoma Uplerlawna Nala Yesus pa Nhi ' a la makpolu-makwak la E ' a de Enlokar nohora . Mere edonna rnair ma'ta liokra emkare pa ra rlokra makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna maka ha rran ulu re .
for they indeed have been made priests without an oath , but he with an oath by him that says of him , The Lord swore and will not change his mind , ‘ You are a priest forever , according to the order of Melchizedek . ' ||| Mere rrana Yesus pa Nla ' a makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna , de rnairia liokra maka Uplerlawna Nakota la E ' a , Niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nlokr olekwa me hota E ' edonna Naheri-nawalia E lirni . O ' di de makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna id O ' a pa nodi liarni pa nodi liarni .
By so much , Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant . ||| La ' Uplerlawna liokarni mak emkade la ' a Yesus pede itat niohora nnio ' a warwuaru di onnila Yesus hihi'ini , narehi-nalawan la ' deulu-tatra ulul die , ne hota ntutu-nte'ewa .
Many , indeed , have been made priests , because they are hindered from continuing by death . ||| Ina-nara , hadoma ed ma'ta . De makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna imam korni re , riy rahu yoma hare honona rmati pa idma nhernu-nwauga ida , pede rima-rima kniarni re edonna nodia pa la nhoru .
But he , because he lives forever , has his priesthood unchangeable . ||| Mere Yesus de Nmormior pia nodi liarni pede Nhi ' a makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna imam de , riy id mana edonna nhernu-nwauga .
Therefore he is also able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him , seeing that he lives forever to make intercession for them . ||| La ' hade pede la ' a Yesus Nmeh ' a neka nanpena ed mak kodi plolli pa Namori-nalewna la'pa nodi liarni , la ' a riy honona maka kwahaka mormiori la Uplerlawna , de nla lol E ' a . Yoma E edon Nmati pa hota rhernu-rwaug owa'an E ' a , mere Enden nek la pa nodi liarni totpena la ' lera-lera nekpa nodia la'pa nodi liarni de E ed makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini .
For such a high priest was fitting for us , holy , guiltless , undefiled , separated from sinners , and made higher than the heavens , ||| Ne Yesus de mana ed mak kla ' imam o'ta lawanni inhatta pede it mana tahak memna . Yoma E ' de Uplerlawna gahani mak kakleha do ' a-hala . Ralma yata kuku ' to ' mana edon nayamkek et lia . Uplerlawna Ntaw doin E ' la riy mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala . Me Nkenia la gen tiutullu-lolo'oni mak ktullu kareh dioinia lyanit marna .
who does n't need , like those high priests , to offer up sacrifices daily , first for his own sins , and then for the sins of the people . For he did this once for all , when he offered up himself . ||| E ' ematia ' a imam o'ta lawanni re korni , pa la ' lera-ler de ra rwahi ' a-rwayodia nhioi-tniani , ral ulga la ' a do ' a-hal wamueheni rerieini nhor nioma ral owa'ana nhioi-tniani la ' a luwu-a'na do'oni-halli wali . Mere Yesus Nala hoihoi-tantiani eneknek to ' a raralamni nmemeh ' a pa nodia pa la nhoru . La ' a ler de de E orgahani ed maka khur dioinia inonni pa Nhi ' a la hopopa-hegeuru hoihoi-tantiani .
For the law appoints men as high priests who have weakness , but the word of the oath , which came after the law , appoints a Son forever who has been perfected . ||| Riy maka deulu-tatra agama Yahudi nrana pa rhi ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la ' a Yahudi re rerieini , de rakleh ruri-lai pede rhi ' a-ryapia do ' a-hala . Mere la'pa Musa nala deulu-tatra agama de nhor pua lera nla'-nmai nioka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a nnio ' id owa'an la Yahudi re , de Nlokar nohora . Emkade pede E ' ed maka krana E A'nani pa Nla ' a makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la rimormiori rerieini . E A'nani de Nakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti pede Nodi plolli-mneheni la ' a kniar die nodia pa nodi liarni .
Now in the things which we are saying , the main point is this , we have such a high priest , who sat down on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens , ||| Ina-nara , la ' lira ri onni de nnia'eratni emkadilla , Itlernan oleka imam o'ta lawanni makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini . Enamtatna la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu walli malganna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa rewre'wa rodi plolli .
a servant of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched , not man . ||| Entulla-nkar die emeka imam o'ta lawanni la ' a kniola tieru-niawur nehla geni inhatta la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha , maka Orgahi-Orha ' a orgahani ed mak khi ' nan de . E ' edonna Ntulla-nkar lia Uplerlawna roma kreini ralamni la nohkeran di wawannu maka rimormiori rhi ' nana la kok lawan Kemah de .
For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices . Therefore it is necessary that this high priest also have something to offer . ||| Nhi'inde rrana imam o'ta lawna de totpa nala nhioi-tniani onde prehena-mau la Uplerlawna . Pede hota emkade walia Yesus , ita imam o'ta lawanni de . E ' mana Nal walia hanni hadom pa rhi ' a la hoihoi-tantiani .
For if he were on earth , he would not be a priest at all , seeing there are priests who offer the gifts according to the law , ||| Ne la'pa E ' ed ma'ta la noha wawannu mana , E edonna Nhi ' memna imam o'ta lawanni . Yoma imam o'ta lawanni mak kden olek la re er mak kala nhioi-tniani pa emeka deulu-tatra agama Yahudi ha rakot targ oleka .
who serve a copy and shadow of the heavenly things , even as Moses was warned by God when he was about to make the tabernacle , for he said , See , you shall make everything according to the pattern that was shown to you on the mountain . ||| Mere plollolli de kniar miaka imam-imam re ha rkari la roma-krei die ralamni , emekwalima hya ' a makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha memannu-tatarni pa nhi'inde rlernohora . Hade ed mak kariei piede Uplerlawna Nakota la Musa la ' a ler ululu delloo ! Yoma la ' ler de Musa niwa nariria Orgahi-Orha ' a roma kreini maka ha rhi ' a la kok lawna pa rhi ' emeka hoiwialli Kemah , Uplerlawna Nakot emkadilla Musa Niwra , Mhioratrer momuoga hare , muriria hade de mliernohora kniola tieru-niawur nehla genni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha maka Atiutg olek tiy o ' a la ' a wo'ora hananni .
But now he has obtained a more excellent ministry , by as much as he is also the mediator of a better covenant , which on better promises has been given as law . ||| Mere kniari makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini imam di maka Yesus Nlernan de , nareh mieman la imam honona re kniar samounu . Emkade walia nnio ' mak ktawli'iru maka Yesus Nhi ' a de totpena itora Uplerlawna tkalwied owa'ana , de naruri-na'orta rehia deulu-tatra ulul die , yoma nodia kalwieda-paitiota mak kareh mieman la ' ululu gahani de .
For if that first covenant had been faultless , then no place would have been sought for a second . ||| Yoma la'pa deulu-tatra mak kala ' ulu nodi plolli pa nod it pa tor Uplerlawna tkalwieda , hota hya ' owa'an ed mak kariei pia Uplerlawna Nala nnio ' dino ? !
For finding fault with them , he said , Behold , the days are coming , says the Lord , that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah , ||| Yoma la ' emkameni ho'mana riy rlernana deulu-tatra ulul die , Uplerlawna Nwaghal ma't ira yoma edonna rlernohora de . La ' hade pede Nhar lirni Niwra , Mitlin tek A li'ru ri ! Hota lerni-melli nte'ewa , de A ' g ed maka khi ' a nnio ' a warwuaru la ' a hairi Israel nora hairi Yehuda .
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt , for they did n't continue in my covenant , and I disregarded them , says the Lord . ||| De ematia ' a deulu-tatra maka Agala la Yahudi upni-tgarni pa rlernohora la ' lera A'ulakra la Mesir pa rlergota . Yoma la ' ler de ir edonna ratlina-ratailla deulu-tatra maka Agala ira , pede la ' ler de Agolin doin a li'mu la ira .
For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days , says the Lord , I will put my laws into their mind , I will also write them on their heart . I will be their God , and they will be my people . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de A'ukot targa hadi , de hota Agora Israel duratni-waitni tetema mhi ' wutu nnio ' a la lera-mel mak kmai nieka ri . Hota Akenia A rio'ru-lia'yu la ira o'tani kriahlanu , me Aghorat targa la ira ihranu ralamni . Hota A ' g ed maka khi ' a Uplerlawan la ira , me ir rwal lia A mu'tu-rah ' u .
They will not teach every man his fellow citizen and every man his brother , saying , ‘ Know the Lord , ' for all will know me , from their least to their greatest . ||| Hota ir edonna rwatutg owa'an ira luwnu-a'nani walli , onde rwe'er nohora la inni-narni totpena ratga Orgahi-Orha ' a . Yoma ir honona kuku'uni-lalawanni , patke ' a rora muanke ' a , maktaru-makakleha hota ratg olek A ' wua .
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness . I will remember their sins and lawless deeds no more . ||| Yoma hota A ' g ed maka kwe'er ir la ' a do'oni-halli ralamni , ne ghortaplinga ir do'oni-halli .
In that he says , A new covenant , he has made the first obsolete . But that which is becoming obsolete and grows aged is near to vanishing away . ||| Hade pede ina-nar miy re , Uplerlawna Nwet la nnio ' warwuaru die , yoma nnia'eratni Uplerlawna Nhi ' a deulu-tatra mak kala ' ul die de nwal lia ngakum olekwa ! Ne maka ha mahneka de , de hota nmol wua .
Now indeed even the first covenant had ordinances of divine service and an earthly sanctuary . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa itakot nohora Musa deullu-tatarni la ' mulaliaini . Deulu-tatar de ed mak kwahaur nohora kniola tieru-niawur nehla me la ' walia roma-krei maka Israel rimormiorni ha rakoki-rayap niana pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla la .
For a tabernacle was prepared . In the first part were the lamp stand , the table , and the show bread , which is called the Holy Place . ||| Rariria roma-krei die , ha rnairia kok lawna maka ha rhi ' a emeka hoiwialli . Ne kamir no ' gaini la roma-krei die rweta la Geni Makmou-Kwitna . La ' hande de e rken tiarga wa'du wniatatgeni me e rken tiar walia mei , nora roti la wawannu , mak ha rhoi-rtania la Uplerlawna .
After the second veil was the tabernacle which is called the Holy of Holies , ||| La ' walia rialma , la ' a kok tniawa wornu de to'orni , de kamri ida de rweta la Genia Momuou-Witwitan Memna .
having a golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant overlaid on all sides with gold , in which was a golden pot holding the manna , Aaron 's rod that budded , and the tablets of the covenant , ||| La ' a gen die de rkenia katri'ana maka rala maha ra rhi ' nana totpena rtutnia ayalli kemenyan la , me luwuau nnio ' taru maka ha ral maha ra rwow nan ulatni . La ' a luwuau die ralamni , de kekna maha maka kamniota manna , Harun lie'enni maka ka'uhwu olekwa , me watu maroro ' a maka e rhorat targa Uplerlawna riorni-liaini termida rella wawannu .
and above it cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat , of which things we ca n't speak now in detail . ||| La ' a luwuau die wawannu , de e rken tiarga atiehra woru mak knair liwarni maka rtolliohora Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu , nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna mak kodi plolli-mneheni etla hande . Atiehra rora liwarni ranieh ' a la luwuau die tutawnu wawannu , de la ' gen miaka rwe'er doinia rira do'oni-halli . Mere hare honona la ' roma-krei die ralamni yamkekni nora kniarni de ta'en niana awuahaur nohor wal lia .
Now these things having been thus prepared , the priests go in continually into the first tabernacle , accomplishing the services , ||| Emkade pede rkeni hare honona la genni-tienni , demade lera-ler nekpa imam-imam re rla ' a roma-krei die ralamni , la ' a walli gaini totpena rtulla-rkari .
but into the second the high priest alone , once in the year , not without blood , which he offers for himself and for the errors of the people . ||| Mere mak kodi liarni la Gen Momuou-Witwitan Memna la ' ralamni , de eneknek to'ama imam-imam re o'ta lawanni . Enmemeh ' a nla ' hande , anni id de nla ' nan ralamni . Ne nla ' hande , de nodi miemna rara , totpena na nhoi-ntania Uplerlawna , la ' a do ' a-hal wamueheni me riy mutlialawna re do'oni-halli maka raplin niohora rhi ' nan oleka wa .
The Holy Spirit is indicating this , that the way into the Holy Place was n't yet revealed while the first tabernacle was still standing . ||| Enmeh ' a nla ' hande pa nhoi-ntania totpa Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Ntut rer miemna talan maka itmemeh ' a tlol pa tla'awa la ' a Uplerlawna Geni Momuounu-Witwitanni Memna , de edonna naphyar mia'ta la rimormior ita yoma roma-krei ululu de rnair rer mia'ta .
This is a symbol of the present age , where gifts and sacrifices are offered that are incapable , concerning the conscience , of making the worshiper perfect , ||| Me prehena-mau , nhioi-tniani maka riy rodia pa rala la ' a roma-krei die ralamni ta'en niana ra rwe'er doin riy la ' a do'oni-halli ralamni yoma hare de memannu-tatarni to ' a la hya ' mak hota kmai .
being only with foods and drinks and various washings fleshly ordinances , imposed until a time of reformation . ||| Yoma hya ' maka deulu-tatra de ha nakot nohora , de eneknek to ' a la ya'ana-yemnu , me la ' walia hya ' to ' maka ha riwra rhi ' a la yamou-yawitna la rimormiori inonni , mere edon namou-nawitan walia rira ihranu ralamni . Ira rlernohor neka deulu-tatar de pa la'pa ntutu-nte'ewa la ' Uplerlawna nnio ' warwuarnu lerni .
But Christ having come as a high priest of the coming good things , through the greater and more perfect tabernacle , not made with hands , that is to say , not of this creation , ||| Pede la ' ler maka Yesus Kristus Nmai wia , de emeka makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini , de imam o'ta lawanni mak kodia ra ' a-palu , kalwieda-paitiota , yamori-yalewna la ' a nnio ' warwuar die , de E ' edon Nler la roma-krei ralamni maka rimormiori rkar niana la nohkeran di wawannu , mere Enler la kniola tieru-niawur nehla geni mak kareh miemna , maka Orgahi-Orha ' a orgahani Nwahi ' a-nwayodia la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
nor yet through the blood of goats and calves , but through his own blood , entered in once for all into the Holy Place , having obtained eternal redemption . ||| Mere Enler la kniola tieru-niawur nehla geni mak kmou-kwitan memna , maka plollolli inhatta , de E ' edon Nlernohora imam o'ta lawanni Yahudi hihi'ini pa Nodia pipi-duma rarni , onde hayori a'na rarni totpena Nhi ' a la nhioini-tnianni . Mere Enod tio ' a E rar wamueheni pa Nler la hande eneknek to'ama raralamni nmemeh ' a , totpena Nal hade pa na Ntuwu-nhai it pa Nwe'er doin it la ' a wutwutu-kokgohu ralamni pa la'pa nodi liarni .
For if the blood of goats and bulls , and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled , sanctify to the cleanness of the flesh , ||| Pipi-duma rarni nora hayori ltiata rarni me la ' walia hayor a'na rara mak ha rtunu-rharna awnu , rnairia pa rwektia la riy inonni totpena rhi ' amou-awitna riy mak ta'en niana rre'ela krei-iskola yoma ir de inonni rakdieha-raktiahli .
how much more will the blood of Christ , who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without defect to God , cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God ? ||| La'pa pipi-duma nor wutga hayori rarni rnairia pa rhi ' amou-awitna it inonni de hota yeher to ' pa Yesus Kristus rarni ed maka kuhi-kho'or it ihranu ralamni la ' a do ' a-hala mak kod lia matmiati , totpena hota itkola tieru-tawur nehla la Uplerlawna , de Uplerlawna inhatta , mak kdella pa nodi liarni . Yesus Kristus orgahani Nhoi-ntania inonni mak kakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti la Uplerlawna , yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli makden pa nodi liarni Nala E rurni-laini la E ' a .
For this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant , since a death has occurred for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first covenant , that those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance . ||| La ' hade pede Yesus Kristus Nwal lia taliorta-lakatrai lol letgara la ' a nnio ' warwuaru totpena riy maka Uplerlawna Npol niana , de rlernana Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu , yamorni-yalewanni la'pa hare honona maka Enano'targ oleka la ira me mak kod pia nodi liarni . Hare honona de hota irlernana yoma Yesus Nmati totpena Ntuwu-nhai ira . Totpena la ' talan emkade pede Nwe'er doin olek ir la do ' a-hala maka irhi ' nana la ' ler maka rlernohor ma'ta deulu-tatra la mulaliaini de .
For where a last will and testament is , there must of necessity be the death of him who made it . ||| Ina-nara , la'pa riy ida edon nmat mia'ta mere nhi'taru horta na natniemna re'eni-tniarnu la ' a duratni-waitni upni-a'nani warisan , ta'en niana rnairia horat de la'pa edon rat niohor memna riy mak khi ' horat de nmati olekwa .
For a will is in force where there has been death , for it is never in force while he who made it lives . ||| Yoma la'pa riy maka khi ' a horat de e nmormior mia'ta , de horat de edonna rnairia . La'pa mak khi ' horat de nmat wia nanpena horat de rnairia .
Therefore even the first covenant has not been dedicated without blood . ||| La ' hade pede deulu-tatra la mulaliaini nek de edonna rhi ' a , eneknek to'ama e rnairia ha mormiori mak kmati oleka rarni .
For when every commandment had been spoken by Moses to all the people according to the law , he took the blood of the calves and the goats , with water and scarlet wool and hyssop , and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people , ||| La ' ler ululu de , la ' mulaliaini de Musa ed mak kakot nohora momuoga deulu-tatra maka Uplerlawna Nala la hairi Israel , la'pa nhorwua noma Musa na'ala hayori a'na rarni me pipi rarni na'nama na'itar wutga gera , nhorwua noma Musa na'ala au hisop akni nora dum wulu muermerni na'nama nto ' a au nor dum wul die la ' a rar maka kawniah ' olek la gera na'nama nkarga la Puka mak kapniopna mak Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni riorni-liaini rdella de , me la ' walia la riy Israel wawannu wali .
saying , This is the blood of the covenant which God has commanded you . ||| La'pa nhi ' rerer hare dewade Musa niwra , Rar di ed maka rnairia pa rhi ' aruri Uplerlawna nnio'oni . Ne Uplerlawna Nhopan pa miy hononmi mliernohora deulu-tatar de .
He sprinkled the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry in the same way with the blood . ||| Nhor nioma emekwalia Musa nhi ' olek la Puk mak kapniopan de , de nkarga rar de la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a roma kreini , me yohya ' a honona maka ha rnairia la roma-krei die ralamni pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Uplerlawna .
According to the law , nearly everything is cleansed with blood , and apart from shedding of blood there is no remission . ||| Meman nek la agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni nhopan pa trema honona re de rnairia rara pa ra ramou-rawitna yoma yamou-yawitan la rira do'oni-halli de eneknek to ' a rnair rara .
It was necessary therefore that the copies of the things in the heavens should be cleansed with these , but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these . ||| La ' hade pede hare honona maka rnairia la roma-krei die pa ra rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Uplerlawna de , rnairia pipi onde hayorni rarni pa ramou-rawitna re . Maka rnairia pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla de memannu-tatarni la ' a hya ' ed makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mere la ' a hya ' ed maka rnairia pa ramou-rawitna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha de hade inponni narehelia pipi hayori rarni maka ha rhoi-rtania pa ra ramou-rawitna .
For Christ has n't entered into holy places made with hands , which are representations of the true , but into heaven itself , now to appear in the presence of God for us , ||| Yoma Yesus Kristus edonna Nler la Geni Momuou-Witwitan Memna la ' a roma-krei , maka rimormiori limni enni , mak ha rna'etga la ' a Geni Momuou-Witwitan Memna maka plollolli . Mere Enler la kniola tieru-niawur nehla Geni Momuou-Witwitna inhatta la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Totpa la ' lera-mela ri de E ' ed mak kwak la Uplerlawna la ' a it rerieini .
nor yet that he should offer himself often , as the high priest enters into the holy place year by year with blood not his own , ||| Yahudi re makla ' imam o'ta lawanni de , la anni-anin nek de rler la Gen Momuou-Witwitan Memna , la ' a roma-krei die ralamni de rodia hayori onde pipi-duma rarni . Mere Yesus Kristus edonna Nlernohor imam o'ta lawanni hihi'ini-yapyapni re . Enla ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha totpena Nhoi-ntan niek la E inonni raralamni nmeh ' a .
or else he must have suffered often since the foundation of the world . But now once at the end of the ages , he has been revealed to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself . ||| Yoma la'pa anni-anni nekpa Nhi ' inonni la hoihoi-tantiani , de hota Enlernan nekneka kropna-krieutu yamuki-yama'ala la ' a lerni Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayapia nohkeran di pa nodi liarni . Mere la ' lera-mela ri maka rweta la ler maka hota kod lia lera noha niatni , de Enmai pia Nhoi-ntania inonni de raralamni nmeh ' a totpena Nkuhi-nho'or doinia it do'oni-halli .
Inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once , and after this , judgment , ||| Ne hota emeknekama Uplerlawna Nakota de hota rimormiori rmat die raralamni nmeh ' a pa nhorwua nanpena Uplerlawna ed maka khudi-kpara re ,
so Christ also , having been offered once to bear the sins of many , will appear a second time , not to deal with sin , but to save those who are eagerly waiting for him . ||| hota emkade walia Yesus Kristus mana Nmat pia raralamni nmeh ' a wali pa Nhi ' a inonni la hopopa-hegeuru hoihoi-tantiani totpena na Nwuri-nohma doinia rirahu re do'oni-halli . Ne hota Enawal pia Nmai lia re'eni wornu . De hota edonna Nmai totpena Nhi ' aplol owa'ana do ' a-hala , mere totpena Namori-nalewna riy mak kwei rieri-knar reria E ' a .
For the law , having a shadow of the good to come , not the very image of the things , can never with the same sacrifices year by year , which they offer continually , make perfect those who draw near . ||| Ina-nara , agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni de emekneka memannu-tatarni to ' a la ra ' a-palu , kalwieda-paitiota , yamori-yalewna mak hota Uplerlawna Nalharia . It edon tlernan hare honona la ' a deulu-tatar de . La ' hade pede deulu-tatar de ta'en niana nhi ' aplola-amneh ' a riy mak kmai pia kola tieru-kawur nehla la Uplerlawna de rodia nhioini-tnianni la ' anni-anin neka .
Or else would n't they have ceased to be offered , because the worshipers , having been once cleansed , would have had no more consciousness of sins ? ||| Yoma hota plollolli pa deulu-tatar de ed maka khi ' amou-awitna riy yoma rala nhioi-tniani re la ' a re'eni id ralamni , hota hya ' owa'an ed mak kariei piede la ' anni-anin neka pa rmai owa'an pa rala nhioi-tniani yoma rakwar ma'ta ir do'oni-halli la wawayanni ? Hota la'pa deulu-tatar de nhi ' aplola do'oni-halli de edon rodi owa'an nhioini-tnianni toh ? !
But in those sacrifices there is a yearly reminder of sins . ||| Mere tamkek memna nhioi-tniani maka ha rodia pa ra rhoi-rtan lia anni-anin de , nreinian to ' pa anni-anin de ir e rhoratreria ir de , de riy mak khi ' reri-kyap reri do ' a-hala .
For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins . ||| Yoma plola la hayori ltiata rarni me pipi rarni mana hota edonna nwuri-nohma do ' a-hala .
Therefore when he comes into the world , he says , You did n't desire sacrifice and offering , but you prepared a body for me . ||| La ' hade pede la ' lerni Yesus Kristus Nmai lia nohkerna wawannu , Enakot la Uplerlawna , Uplerlawnu ne ! O edonna Mpuak nana nhioi-tniani , patuini-paro'onni maka ha rhoi-rtani . Mere rwaldioinia de O ' ed maka khi ' taru-kyap tiarga inona mai A ' u pa emeka hoihoi-tantiani mak hota Agal tiy O ' a .
You had no pleasure in whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin . ||| O ' edonna Mpuaka nhioi-tniani maka ha rtunu-rharna la katri'ana wawannu onde nhioi-tniani korni maka ha rala rwauga do'oni-halli .
Then I said , ‘ Behold , I have come in the scroll of the book it is written of me to do your will , O God . ' ||| Noma A'ukota , A ' g inhatti Uplerlawnu ne ! Amuai die totpena liernohora O ralma-riormu pa emeka rakot oleka la Puka mak kapniopan de ralamni mai A ' u .
Previously saying , Sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin you did n't desire , neither had pleasure in them those which are offered according to the law , ||| Yesus Kristus Nakot ul lia Uplerlawna , O edonna Mpuaka nhioi-tniani patuini-paro'onni maka ha rhoi-rtani onde hoihoi-tantiani maka ha rtunu-rharna la katri'ana wawannu , la'pa nhioi-tniani korni maka ha rala pa ra rhernu-rwau dioini do ' a-hala . Hare honona edon rhi ' ralammu pa nahepru . Yesus Kristus Nakot emkade ho'mana nhioi-tniani re honona de ra rhoi-rtania , yoma rlernohora agama Yahudi deullu-tatarni olekwa .
then he has said , Behold , I have come to do your will . He takes away the first , that he may establish the second , ||| Nhorwua noma Yesus Nakot la , A ' g inhatti Uplerlawnu ne ! A ' g e muai die totpena Aliernohora O ralma-riormu . Pede Uplerlawna Nkuhi-nho'or momuoga patuini-paro'ona , nhioi-tniani mak ha rhi ' nana la ululu re honona , ne Nherun doinia pa Nala Yesus Kristus na Nwauga pa Nhi ' a la hopopa-hegeuru hoihoi-tantiani .
by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all . ||| Yesus Kristus Nlernohora oleka Uplerlawna ralma-riorni de pa Nala inon wamueheni raralamni nmeh ' a pa emeka hoihoi-tantiani mai ita . La ' E inonni maka Ha Nal de , pede itla ' Uplerlawna gahani mak kakleha do ' a-hala .
Every priest indeed stands day by day serving and offering often the same sacrifices , which can never take away sins , ||| Yahudi mak kla ' imama makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la rimormiori rerieini , rala ' nohora tulanni-kniarni la lera-lera , me rhi ' mamain neka nhioi-tniani re . Mere nhioi-tniani me patuini-paro'ona re edonna rwal nian la hadoma pa rala ra rkuhi-rho'ora do ' a-hala .
but he , when he had offered one sacrifice for sins forever , sat down on the right hand of God , ||| Mere Yesus Kristus enekneka Nal inon wamueheni pa Nhi ' a la hoihoi-tantiani la Uplerlawna , totpena na Nhernu-nwauga do ' a-hala re pa nodi liarni . La'pa Nala hoihoi-tantiani pa nhorwua dewade Yesus Kristus Naliwna la Uplerlawna walli malganna , totpena Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi .
from that time waiting until his enemies are made the footstool of his feet . ||| Ne mulaini la ' ler de pa Yesus Kristus Nwei niek la ler maka hota Uplerlawna Naru ' u-natowar momuoga Yesus arwalli re honona .
For by one offering he has perfected forever those who are being sanctified . ||| Yesus Nwei nieka yoma eneknek to ' a Enala hoihoi-tantiani raralamni , mere la ' hade mana , Yesus Kristus Nhi ' aplola-amneh olek pa nodi liarni la riy maka Nkuhi-nho'or la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni .
The Holy Spirit also testifies to us , for after saying , ||| La ' hade walia ed maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nakot nohora ha plollolli mai ita . Enakota Niwra ,
This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days , says the Lord , I will put my laws on their heart , I will also write them on their mind , then he says , ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni , Dodo'ondi de A'ukot targa hadi , de hota Agora ira mhi ' wutu nnio ' a warwuaru la ' lera-mel mak kmai nieka ri . Hota Akenia A rio'ru-lia'yu la ir ihranu ralamni , me Aghorat targa la ira o'tani kriahlanu totpena rat niohora pa rlernohora re .
I will remember their sins and their iniquities no more . ||| Noma Orgahi-Orha ' a Nakot nohor wal lia , Orgahi Aghoratdoin memna do'oni-halli re ror wutga nhioli-liet yatyatni re honona .
Now where remission of these is , there is no more offering for sin . ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa Uplerlawna Namou-nawitna memna it do'oni-halli de , nnia'eratni de yana tsi ' owa'an nhioi-tniani maka ha rala ra rhernu-rwauga it do'oni-halli .
Having therefore , brothers , boldness to enter into the holy place by the blood of Jesus , ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali , hota emkameni mai ita ? Hota it edon tamta'at owa'an pa twakriania Uplerlawna , yoma emeknekama tler olek la genia mak kmou-kwitan memna la ' a do ' a-hala , onnila Yesus rarni mak kakhuri olek la it rerieini .
by the way which he dedicated for us , a new and living way , through the veil , that is to say , his flesh , ||| Yesus ed maka khar tialan warwuaru die mai ita , mak hota kodi it la mormiori-dardiari . Enhar tialan la genia momuou-witwitan de la ' a Enal inonni pa rwunu-rwenna . E inonni de emeknekama kok lawna maka ra rahew tiarga liolgeni la kamir mak momuou-witwitan meman de la ' a krei ralamni , noma kok de emalihirwah ' a la woru .
and having a great priest over God 's house , ||| Pede ina-nara , onnila la ' dodo'ondi de tlernan oleka makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini id olek wa maka karehi-kalawna , me mak kodi plolli la ' a Uplerlawna romni mniotni ,
let 's draw near with a true heart in fullness of faith , having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and having our body washed with pure water , ||| la ' hade pede mai pia itwakrian reria Uplerlawna . Itwakrian reria Uplerlawna de tal toto ' memna it ihranu ralamni maka ha rwaloi-rwale'er oleka la ' a do ' a-hala pa emeknekama ra rkarg olek rara la , nor wutga it pesiayni mak karuri , me it inonni maka ral oleka gera ra ramou-rawitna la ' a nhiarani ralamni .
let 's hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering , for he who promised is faithful . ||| Mai pia itorreria pitpitga ita pesiayni la Yesus maka itwayow nohor oleka la rira gaini ralamni , yoma Uplerlawna nanpena ed maka kdenreri setia , ne hota E ' edonna Nhortaplin maka Ha Nano'taru re .
Let 's consider how to provoke one another to love and good works , ||| Ne it mana it idma natu nhedu-ntehra ida totpena idma natu ntulla-nsayn ida me totpena tsi ' a-tyapia kalwiedwedni .
not forsaking our own assembling together , as the custom of some is , but exhorting one another , and so much the more as you see the Day approaching . ||| Mai pia tape'el la yawoka-yale ' u la ' a kniola tieru-niawur nehla la Uplerlawna . Yana mliernohora riy mak kahmena rawok pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla la Uplerlawna . Mere yeher to ' pa it idma nhedu-ntehra ida totpa pesiayni la ' ga ' a , yoma miat mueman nohora de Orgahi-Orha ' a maimiaini la ' a re'eni wornu de nrehgorgoru olekwa !
For if we sin willfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth , there remains no more a sacrifice for sins , ||| Yoma la'pa kot maka kaplola-kamneh ' a mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna rakot oleka la mai ita , mere ita o'ta tehra ma'ta pa it edonna tollia it do'oni-halli , ne ittot pa tsortaplinu-twaliateman nohora , de hota maka ha rnair pa ra rhoi-rtani hadamon olekwa pa ra rhernu-rwauga it do'oni-halli .
but a certain fearful expectation of judgment , and a fierceness of fire which will devour the adversaries . ||| Mere eneknek to ' a twei pia itwatrom la Uplerlawna watghudni-lokarni nora ai mormiori mak kodia E ralam mehrani mak hota ktutni-kharna momuou riy maka khoklira-kpah ' a waw la E ' a .
A man who disregards Moses ' law dies without compassion on the word of two or three witnesses . ||| Riy maka edonna klernohora deulu-tatra Musa , de rukum penan memna , de edonna rtutga sniayni la ira . Ne la'pa riy woru-wotelu niek de er mak kamkek memna riy de nhi ' do ' a-hala pa rre ' wal pia rwaghala e ' a , hota makhudi-kpara netlia de riy de nhala .
How much worse punishment do you think he will be judged worthy of who has trodden under foot the Son of God , and has counted the blood of the covenant with which he was sanctified an unholy thing , and has insulted the Spirit of grace ? ||| La'pa emkade la ' a Musa deullu-tatarni de , hota yeher to ' pa werat rehia maka rala rukmua la ' riy maka kwatei-kwahapra Wutmueha-Laimieha , maka kpar la pihini petanni-lia'arni weranni la ' a Yesus rarni maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa pa Ntuwu-nhai ita totpa it do'oni-halli re honona ema rwuri-rohma dodioinia , me maka kapolu-kaliella Uplerlawna Nhiwni mak kala sniayanni mai ita .
For we know him who said , Vengeance belongs to me . I will repay , says the Lord . Again , The Lord will judge his people . ||| Yoma it tat niohora Uplerlawna ed mak kakot tiwra , Hota A ' g ed mak kwahla me A ' g ed mak kukmua . Me Nakot walia , Hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Ntorna watghudi la ' a E mutnu-rahanu .
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God . ||| Adoh ! La'pa itler la Uplerlawna mak kden pa nodi liarni niukamnu de , itamta'at wen ita !
But remember the former days , in which , after you were enlightened , you endured a great struggle with sufferings , ||| Mere ina-nara ama-hyali miy , mhioratreria la ' ler delloo , la ' ler maka mliernan oleka Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni . La ' ler de mliernan walia kropna-krieutu pa mpiolpuol inmi-mpiakwak ammi , mere miy edonna mpialer la miy pesiaymi .
partly , being exposed to both reproaches and oppressions , and partly , becoming partakers with those who were treated so . ||| Lera dom de riy rapolu-ralielan miy , ne rwehwa yotyota-yatyat tiy miy , de emeknekama oha-ahu la ' a mutlialawna gaini ralamni . Lera dom de miy miana mtiulla-msiayn nohora riy mak kler la yapolu-yaliella , kropanni-krieutnu mak emeknekama mliernan oleka de .
For you both had compassion on me in my chains and joyfully accepted the plundering of your possessions , knowing that you have for yourselves a better possession and an enduring one in the heavens . ||| Me mtiulla-msiaynia riy mak kler la roma nhio'la ralamni . Ne la'pa rwarui-rwate'la nana miy hyonmi-hyanmi , de miy edonna mikotkot hadom la re mere miy ralammi rahepur reri , yoma miy e miat niohora de miy re'emi-tniarmi ed ma'ta , ne narehi-nalawan meman la ' a re'emi-tniarmi maka ha rwarui-rwate'la nan oleka re . Ne hota re'emi-tniarmi mak karehi-kalawan de nodia pa nodi liarni .
Therefore do n't throw away your boldness , which has a great reward . ||| Pa hota ina-narmi re ! Yana mpialer la miy pesiaymi . Yoma la'pa miy pesiaymi naruri , de hota miy siepmi-kaimi maka rwahla tiy miy lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha , hota nareh liawlawna .
For you need endurance so that , having done the will of God , you may receive the promise . ||| Pede mdien rer niek la pesiaymi totpena la ' emkade pede mhi ' nana-myap niana hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nwahaka tiy miy . Ne hota la'pa miy e mhi ' nan emkade de hota mliernana hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa tiy miy .
In a very little while , he who comes will come and will not wait . ||| Mhi ' emkade , yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de , e niwra , Hota E ' mak kmai die Nmahrur pua Nmai wia . Hota maimiaini E ' edon Nelga mahnekneka .
But the righteous one will live by faith . If he shrinks back , my soul has no pleasure in him . ||| Ne A mu'tu-rah ' u makden la plol wawna , hota rmori-rdari lia ir pesiayni wawannu pa nodi liarni . Mere la'pa riy dom la ira e rod lia li'iru la pesiay , de hota A ralmu namehra la ira .
But we are not of those who shrink back to destruction , but of those who have faith to the saving of the soul . ||| Mere it makpesiay di , de riy mak kaplinu kod lia li'iru la ' a pesiay , pa hota it edon tler tar lia Uplerlawna niukamnu me edonna rrinni it la ai mormiori ralamni . Rwaldioinia de , it nanpena er mak kpesiaya Uplerlawna , pede it di de ed mak klernana mormiori-lewlewna .
Now faith is assurance of things hoped for , proof of things not seen . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mai pia twahaur nohora pesiay . La'pa pesiay nden la ita , itat niohora de hota it tlernan memna hya ' ed mak itwakwak pa tlernana , mak edonna kayamkek ma'ta .
For by this , the elders obtained approval . ||| Yoma onnila it upni-tgarni mak kden la ululu pesiayni re pede Uplerlawna Nwayow nohora re .
By faith we understand that the universe has been framed by the word of God , so that what is seen has not been made out of things which are visible . ||| Ne yoma la ' a it pesiayni , pede itat niohora de la ' a nohkeran di ed maka Uplerlawna Nal nek lirni pa na Na'ohi-na'ara de . Emkade pede hya ' ed maka kayamkeka , de Ha Nhi ' a la ' a hya ' ed maka edon kayamkeka .
By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain , through which he had testimony given to him that he was righteous , God testifying with respect to his gifts , and through it he , being dead , still speaks . ||| La ' a Habel pesiayni de , pede nala limtutnu la Uplerlawna mak karehia kakni Kain limtutnu . Yoma la ' a pesiayni de , pede Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana Habel pa emeka riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Ntut muemna Enreinian Habel yoma Enreiniana patuini-paro'ona maka Habel ha ntunu-nharan de . Ne Habel nmati-nmolg olekwa , mere emkade ho'mana emeknekama enano ' a-na'at mua'ta it la dodo'ondi memna , yoma entutga pesiayni talan mak kaplol de pa itlernohora .
By faith Enoch was taken away , so that he would n't see death , and he was not found , because God translated him . For he has had testimony given to him that before his translation he had been well pleasing to God . ||| Yoma la ' a Henok pesiayni , pede edonna nmati mere narian mormior lia nohkerna wawannu pa rodia la Uplerlawna . Riy id mana edonna rlernan owa'an e ' a yoma Uplerlawna ed maka kran mormioria de . Itat niohora Uplerlawna Nran e ' a onnila pesiay yoma la'pa edonna rran nan ma'ta Henok , de Uplerlawna Nakota Niwra , Henok de nhi ' nan oleka hya ' mak kla ' nan A ralmu .
Without faith it is impossible to be well pleasing to him , for he who comes to God must believe that he exists , and that he is a rewarder of those who seek him . ||| Ne la'pa pesiay edonna nden mai ita , de Uplerlawna ralamni edonna Nal nan memn ita . Yoma riy maka Uplerlawna Nreiniana de , eneknek to ' a mak kwahak E ' a , yoma npesiaya de Uplerlawna etla me npesiaya de hota Uplerlawna ed mak kala ra'ani-pallu la riy mak kal ralamni tetema pa nwahak E ' a .
By faith Noah , being warned about things not yet seen , moved with godly fear , prepared a ship for the saving of his house , through which he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith . ||| Yoma la ' a Nuh pesiayni , pede nlernohora Uplerlawna lirni . Uplerlawna Nakot momuou hya ' a-hya ' a mak hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' a la ' a ler li'iru . Nuh edonna namkek ma'ta mak emkade , mere emkade ho'mana Nuh na'unni-namta'ata Uplerlawna pa natlina-natailla ne nakoki-nayapia aupual liawna mak hota kamori-kalewan nan owa'an enora e romni mniotni . Hota la ' e pesiayni de pede Uplerlawna Nwet e la riy mak kaplol la E yamkekni . Ne la ' hade wal pia nohkerna nlernana niukmu , yoma rahmena ratlin la Uplerlawna lirni pa emeka Nuh nhi ' nan de .
By faith Abraham , when he was called , obeyed to go out to the place which he was to receive for an inheritance . He went out , not knowing where he went . ||| Yoma la ' a Abraham pesiayni , pede nlernohora Uplerlawna la'pa Uplerlawna Npolga pa Nhopna nla'awa noh lawna-rai liawna ida maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la . Noma Abraham nlernohora Uplerlawna lirni pa nla'awa , kennama naplin niohora hota e nla'aw hanmeni .
By faith he lived as an alien in the land of promise , as in a land not his own , dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob , the heirs with him of the same promise . ||| La ' a Abraham pesiayni pede e ' de emolmolla do'ona-dakna la ' a gen miaka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la e ' a . Abrahama ndella hande de nakleh ma'ta likti temtemna mere nhol niek la hoiwialli tenda . Hota emkade wal lia e upni-a'nani Isak nora Yakop , yoma gen miaka Uplerlawna Nano'taru la Abraham , de ir wal pia er mak klernana gen die wali .
For he was looking for the city which has foundations , whose builder and maker is God . ||| Abraham natahan ralamni la ' a mormiorni mak emkade yoma entepartarlia wniei la ' a leta warwuaru maka Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nariria Nlernohora E ralma-rior wamueheni , mak hota emekneka roma maka ha rariria la watu liar pianulu mak karuri-ka'orta pa edonna nwo'la la ' genni pa nodi liarni .
By faith even Sarah herself received power to conceive , and she bore a child when she was past age , since she counted him faithful who had promised . ||| La ' a Abraham pesiayni , pede enlernana duratni-waitni la Sara , maka yamkekni de rora rhamto ' a-rhape'ewa , la'pa reriehenu de Sar nek de nkeran la ya ' a'na . Mere irlernan a'na yoma Abraham npesiay toto ' memna hota Uplerlawna edonna Nhortaplinga nnio'oni .
Therefore as many as the stars of the sky in multitude , and as innumerable as the sand which is by the sea shore , were fathered by one man , and him as good as dead . ||| Pede la ' ler de , de Abrahama nhamto'owa pa edonna nlernan a'na yoma inonni nmati , la'pa emkade ho'mana e o'ta watnu nmeh ' a mere e ' ed mak klernana durti-waiti mak kaniutni-kamdierna , pa emeknekama eni-tani , me wtion mak kden la lyanti maka takeni rrekan nana liawanni .
These all died in faith , not having received the promises , but having seen them and embraced them from afar , and having confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth . ||| La ' hari honona edonna rwaler la pesiayni la'pa rmat niohor memna . Ir edonna rlernana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru re , mere eneknek to'ama ratlina me rhoratreria . Ne la ' hade pede iriwra ir de do'ona-dakna makahulti-kahamar to ' ira la ' a nohkeran di wawannu .
For those who say such things make it clear that they are seeking a country of their own . ||| Riy mak kakot emkare de rtutga de ir er mak kat niohor oleka geni-tiena maka hota irhi ' a la ira gen wamueheni .
If indeed they had been thinking of that country from which they went out , they would have had enough time to return . ||| Gen miaka irlergot olek la de , ir edonna rwaror nan hade , yoma hota irwaror nan hade , de hota irlernan talan rahu pa rawal lia gen die .
But now they desire a better country , that is , a heavenly one . Therefore God is not ashamed of them , to be called their God , for he has prepared a city for them . ||| Mere tamkek la de ira rapili-rahniaria geni mak samomuounu rehia nohkerna gahani , makden la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha . La hade pede Uplerlawna edonna Nmola-nma ' a Natlina ir riwra E ' de ira Uplerlawanni , yoma Uplerlawna Nhi ' targ oleka leta id la ira .
By faith , Abraham , being tested , offered up Isaac . Yes , he who had gladly received the promises was offering up his only born son , to whom it was said , Your offspring will be accounted as from Isaac , ||| La ' a Abraham pesiayni de , pede la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nawerta-natailia e pesiayni , de nhi ' a'nani Isak la paro'onni pa niwra nhi ' a la hoihoi-tantiani la Uplerlawna . Abraham nlernan oleka Isak maka Uplerlawna Nano'targ oleka la e ' a , Niwra , Hota a'namu Isak de ed mak kadurti-kawait nana durti-waiti maka A'uno'targa tiy o ' a . Mere emkade ho'mana Abrahama nhur dioin a'na memeheni de pa niwa ntunu-nharna la katri'ana wawannu
concluding that God is able to raise up even from the dead . Figuratively speaking , he also did receive him back from the dead . ||| yoma Abraham npesiaya de hota Uplerlawna ed maka hota kodi plolli pa Namori owa'an Isak la matmiatni . Ne plollolli de la ' ler maka ha niwa nhi ' a Isak la hoihoi-tantiani , de emeknekama Uplerlawna Enamori owa'an Isak la matmiatni ralamni yoma Uplerlawna Nalewna Isak la matmiati la ' a Enala pipi pa nhernu-nwauga Isaka .
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau , even concerning things to come . ||| Yoma Isak pesiayni pede la'pa Isak nhamto ' olekwa , de enano ' a-na'atga e a'nani Yakop nora Esau lia tertera-demdem maka hota a'nani rora rlernana la Uplerlawna la ' tuw li'iru-a'na ga ' a .
By faith Jacob , when he was dying , blessed each of the sons of Joseph , and worshiped , leaning on the top of his staff . ||| Yoma la ' a Yakop pesiayni , pede Yakop la'pa nhi'pa nmat wia , de Yakop nwaka Uplerlawna pa Ntera-ndema Yusup a'nani rora , me nnairia lie'enni pa nhi ' arur inonni pa napriri , pa nkola tieru-nawur nehla la Uplerlawna .
By faith Joseph , when his end was near , made mention of the departure of the children of Israel , and gave instructions concerning his bones . ||| Yoma la ' a Yusup pesiayni pede nhi'pa nmat wia , noma nakot nohora de hota Israel re rlergot la ' noh Mesir emeka Uplerlawna Nakot targ oleka , me nakot tar walia e nnio'oni , la'pa enmati die , rwahi ' a-rwayodi samomuoga e inonni , pa rodia rlergot la Mesir .
By faith Moses , when he was born , was hidden for three months by his parents , because they saw that he was a beautiful child , and they were not afraid of the king 's commandment . ||| Yoma la ' a Musa inni-amni pesiayni pede rade ' a-ramoinia Musa la lera rmor dioinia de , la ' a wolla wotelu ralamni . Yoma irwarora de la Uplerlawna yamkekni de ir a'nani de samoga , hade pede ir edonna ramta'ata ray titni maka enhopan pa rwunu-rwenna makden Israel a'na muanke ' a maka na'nama rayor niana .
By faith Moses , when he had grown up , refused to be called the son of Pharaoh 's daughter , ||| Yoma la ' a Musa pesiayni pede la'pa enlawan wa de nahmena rpolg e la ray Mesir upni-a'nani .
choosing rather to share ill treatment with God 's people than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time , ||| Mere e ralamni nod reria Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu pa enor wutga ir pa rlernana yamuki-yama'ala . Enwarora de yamuki-yama'al de samounu rehia la'pa enor wut riy maka enekneka lera ho'ke'eni to ' pa rlernana yamuki-yahepru la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni .
considering the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt , for he looked to the reward . ||| Musa nwarora de hota nlernana yalernu-yaha ' a yoma la ' a Ray Makamori-Kalewna maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru rerieini , de ha welli narehi-nalawan la re ' a-tniaru maka hota nlernana la Mesir . Yoma Musa nha'ar aranni la siewa-kai maka hota Uplerlawna Nala la ' ler li'iru .
By faith he left Egypt , not fearing the wrath of the king , for he endured , as seeing him who is invisible . ||| Yoma la ' a Musa pesiayni pede e nlergot la Mesir . La ' de edonna namta'ata ray yawenanni . Mere Musa nru ' rer niekpa nler la ga ' a yoma emeknekama enamkek oleka Uplerlawna mak kayade ' de !
By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood , that the destroyer of the firstborn should not touch them . ||| Yoma la ' a Musa pesiayni pede e nhopan pa makden Yahudi re rhi ' a Paska . De Enhopan pa rkarga rara pa ra rakniaga la ' a Israel re romni nhiarni , totpena Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu maka Nhopan pa nwunu-nwenna rimormiori , nmai die yana nwenna Israel re a'na yanullu .
By faith they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land . When the Egyptians tried to do so , they were swallowed up . ||| Yoma la ' a Israel re pesiayni pede rleretia Hletan Mermera Laut Merah , de emeknekama ir e rlol to ' a tan kierna wawannu . Mere Hletan Mermer de nlumu-ntella riy Mesira honona mak kla klernohora Israel re pa rta'aga Hletan Mermer de yahlerni .
By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they had been encircled for seven days . ||| Yoma la ' a riy Israel pesiayni pede rwakdior niana leta Yeriko la ' a lera wo'itu , dewade Yeriko watu liarni-il pidarni ema rgor diodioinia la .
By faith Rahab the prostitute did n't perish with those who were disobedient , having received the spies in peace . ||| Yoma la ' a Rahab , patke ' yatyat de pesiayni , pede e ' edonna nlernana wnienan wutu la ' a riy maka khok lira-kpah ' a waw la Uplerlawna , yoma enpesiaya Uplerlawna pede nreiniana-na'nana riy Israel mak kla kwuwu lia ' a leta Yeriko .
What more shall I say ? For the time would fail me if I told of Gideon , Barak , Samson , Jephthah , David , Samuel , and the prophets- ||| Nah ! La'pa ultier pia godia lia'ru la ' hare honona , hota mahnek rehia pede a ' g edonna ukot nohor plu'unu-plehenu la ' a Gideon , Barak , Simson , Yefta , Daud , Samuel , la'pa makwohorulu-ktatrulu dom to ' a pesiayni .
who through faith subdued kingdoms , worked out righteousness , obtained promises , stopped the mouths of lions , ||| Mere la ' a ir pesiayni pede dom de raru ' u-ratowra hairi-hairi , dom de rla ' mak ktorna-krautu mak kodia rhi'ina-rella , dom de rlernana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru la ira . Dom de er mak kato'ma singa re nurnu .
quenched the power of fire , escaped the edge of the sword , from weakness were made strong , grew mighty in war , and caused foreign armies to flee . ||| Dom de er mak kwarmua ai miak klomlomra , me dom de ralewan nan inonni la riy mak kiwra kala wehla plalahwa pa rdawar wenna re . Dom de rakleha ruri-lai mere rwaldioinia de Uplerlawna Nhi ' ir pa raruri-ralai . Dom de ra'iwar la ar ralma , pede raru ' u-ratowra arwalli maka kwalitna-kwatauru mak kwatiawua noha dom to ' a .
Women received their dead by resurrection . Others were tortured , not accepting their deliverance , that they might obtain a better resurrection . ||| Yoma la ' a doma pesiayni pede patke ' a dom a'nani mak kmati olekwa rmori owa'ana . Ne la ' riy dom pal owa'an de rwayow nohora ir inon wamueheni matmiatni . Irlernan yamuki-yama'ala , nniahora-nniala ' a onnila pesiay mere rahmena rwayow pa rollia ir la , yoma ira wniarorni de hota rmori owa'an la ' mormiori plalahwa ralamni mak samomuou muemna .
Others were tried by mocking and scourging , yes , moreover by bonds and imprisonment . ||| La ' dom pal miana rhi ' a la yahe ' i-yamali , rliwra-rkaklia me rala ranti mnotna ra rwutga , me rkenia la roma nhio'la ralamni .
They were stoned . They were sawn apart . They were tempted . They were slain with the sword . They went around in sheep skins and in goat skins , being destitute , afflicted , ill-treated- ||| Dom pali die rala watu ra rwatliewria pa rmat miemna . Dom pal die rala niadi ra rad wienwenna , me doma de rala wehla ara ra rdawar wenwenna re . Dom de rmeh ' a ralala ' a pa rhewta-rnairia pip ulti-dum ulti , rakleha-raplar nohora neka yamuki-yama'ala , nniahora-nniala ' a .
of whom the world was not worthy-wandering in deserts , mountains , caves , and the holes of the earth . ||| Ir den nek la wo'orletna-kawurloini , me la ' walia hu'ula-liena . Mere plollolli de ir de de riy mak kla ' nan memna Uplerlawna ralamni pede rarehi-ralawan la rimormiori nohkeran di .
These all , having been commended for their faith , did n't receive the promise , ||| Uplerlawna nek de Nwayow nan olek ir honona yoma ir pesiayni re . Mere emkade ho'mana la ' ler de ir edonna rreiniana-ra'nan ma'ta hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'tar lia re !
God having provided some better thing concerning us , so that apart from us they should not be made perfect . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna e Nwarora-nwalaiya samomuounu mai ita , de itor ir rewre'wa pa tlernana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru re , totpena it rewre'wa pa twal lia riy makdella plol wawna la E yamkekni .
Therefore let 's also , seeing we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses , lay aside every weight and the sin which so easily entangles us , and let 's run with perseverance the race that is set before us , ||| Pede , ina-nara ama-hyali , it di de hota emeknekama mak kwarehi la yawlari . Me makpesiay la ' ler ululu re emekneka mak kawlari pa rler olek la hohoni yoma ir mak ktutga pesiay mak kaplola mai ita , ne dodo'ondi de ramkek itawlari . La ' hade pede emeknekama mak kawlari ida nhoplial momuoga hya ' mak khi ' awert e ' a ne nwaleran pa nler ulu lia hohoni , de hota tape'el pa itsopliala hya ' ed maka khi ' a yawuhi-yawe'et mai ita , me la ' a do ' a-hala maka kden rer miamain la it ralamni . Ne mai pia tatehra it ralamni pa tler wut lia wniarehi ralamni , tlernohora nek talla maka Uplerlawna Ntutga mai ita .
looking to Jesus , the author and perfecter of faith , who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross , despising its shame , and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God . ||| Yan tamkek la wali-wali , mere tta'wa tar it matni la Yesus , yoma E ' ed mak ktutga talan mai it la it pesiayni la ' mulaliaini nodia pa la nhoru . Yesus ed mak ktahan reria liwliwra-kakaklu me rkoki-rta'wa la auwlakra hananni ! E ' edonna Nwaror nana matmiatni la auwlakra hananni ed mak kodia molmola-mama ' la E ' a . E wniarorni Nden rer tio'ola he ' i-hepur lawna mak hota ha rtemna la E limni ralamni la ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Ne la ' dodo'ondi , de E ' e Naliwna la liwangen miak kden wut lia Uplerlawna liwangeni tiutullu , la ' wali malganna , pa Enor wutga Uplerlawna rtorna-rraut la ' hande !
For consider him who has endured such contradiction of sinners against himself , that you do n't grow weary , fainting in your souls . ||| Pena mpiaror teka E hihi'ini-yapyapni de totpena hota miy edon mimta'ata pa miwlar lia pesiaymi . Yoma E ' mana Nler la yamuki-yama'ala , nniahora-nniala ' a la ' riy dodo ' a-halala mak khoklira-kpah ' a waw la E ' a .
You have not yet resisted to blood , striving against sin . ||| Ina-nar miy re , la ' a lera-mela ri maka mpialiewan pa mhioitio'or doin miy do'omi-halmi de miy edonna mliernan ma'ta wniunu-wnienna emeka Yesus Nlernana .
You have forgotten the exhortation which reasons with you as with children , My son , do n't take lightly the chastening of the Lord , nor faint when you are reproved by him , ||| Me miy mhiortapling oleka Uplerlawna nnio'oni-niatnu tiy miy mak khi ' aruri miy ihrami-ralammi . Enakot nohora hade yoma Enatga de E a'nani miy . Niwra , Upa-a'na miy re , yana mpiarwah ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a wniatutnu-wniaye'eni la miy . Yana ralammi nmolu-nhelma la'pa Enpol niohor miy .
for whom the Lord loves , he disciplines , and chastises every son whom he receives . ||| Yoma riy maka Ensaynia de , Orgahi-Orha ' a ed maka Nwatutga . Ne E ' wal pia ed mak kliwra-kaklia riy maka Enatga de E a'nani .
It is for discipline that you endure . God deals with you as with children , for what son is there whom his father does n't discipline ? ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa mlier la kropna-krieutu nniahora-nniala ' a , mitatahan nek ralammi . Mpiaror teka , de emeknekama Uplerlawna ed maka kliwra-kaklia miy pa emeka ama ida nor a'nani . Yoma mowen niana ama ida edon nukmua a'nani ? !
But if you are without discipline , of which all have been made partakers , then you are illegitimate , and not children . ||| Ne la'pa miy edonna mliernana niukum pa emekwalia Uplerlawna a'nani re honona nhi'inde rlernana , de nnia'eratni de emeknekama miy die E a'na raralamni atia ' miy .
Furthermore , we had the fathers of our flesh to chasten us , and we paid them respect . Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits and live ? ||| Hya ' reh wial die la'pa rima-rima amni makden noha wawannu de etla , de e ' ed mak kamota-kama'ara me nliwra-nkaklia upni-a'nani . Ne la ' ler de ir upni-a'nani ratu nhu'ru-nhelam la ira . La'pa emkade , de hota emkameni owa'an la it Amlawanni makden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha ? Hota yeher to ' pa itsu'ru-tselma tatlina-tatailla totpena tlernana mormiori-dardiari toh !
For they indeed for a few days disciplined us as seemed good to them , but he for our profit , that we may be partakers of his holiness . ||| Yoma rima-rima amni makden la noha wawannu rwatutu-rwaye ' upni-a'nani de rlernohora hya ' maka irwarora de ed maka kaplola , ne edonna nodia pa la nhor wuali . Mere Uplerlawna Nwatutu-nwaye ' it de Nahaka totpena it orgahani tlernana kalwiedwedni , totpena hota itlernan walia mou-witna la it do'oni-halli pa emeka E wniehwani wali .
All chastening seems for the present to be not joyous but grievous , yet afterward it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it . ||| Plola , la ' lera rliwra-rkakli ita de itkakru yoma ita ralamni nmolu-nhelma . Mere la'pa it treiniana liwliwra-kakakul de pa itlernohora , de la'awa honi demade niukum de ed mak kodi it pa tmormior lia plol wawna me khi ' it pa it ralamni namtiertiernu .
Therefore lift up the hands that hang down and the feeble knees , ||| Pede ina-nara ama-hyali , miy pesiaymi de emolmolan nekama mak karehelia yawlari , pede mpia'ur limmi mak kal mat die pa naruri , me tormi mak kdiwdiwra totpa nmaklekla pa naruri .
and make straight paths for your feet , so what is lame may not be dislocated , but rather be healed . ||| Muwlar die mliola loi-talan mak kaplele'era la ' a rai mtatanni , totpena mak klernohor rer miy mana lakni mak kyata nkalwied owa'ana .
Follow after peace with all men , and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord , ||| Ne mpiahak meman pa miora riy honona mkialwieda . Me mial inonmi la Orgahi-Orha ' a pa mdien rer lia mou-witna la ' a do ' a-hala ralamni . Yoma riy id mana hota edonna namkek nana Orgahi-Orha ' a , enekneka riy mak kakleha do ' a-hala , mak kla ' olek la Orgahi-Orha ' a gahani .
looking carefully lest there be any man who falls short of the grace of God , lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you and many be defiled by it , ||| Hota idma nano ' a-na'atga ida totpena yana riy id mana nhoitio'or doin la e pesiayni la ' a Uplerlawna onnila ralam kalwiedni mak ktuwu-khai olek do'omi-halmi . Yanpa hota riy maka khoitio'or doini e pesiayni de ralamni namehra rehia noma nlergot pa hota nodia makpesiay harahu totpena rhi ' nana hya ' mak edon kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni . Riy mak kodia makpesiay wialli la ' klieratni de emeknekama yawuli-yatniamni maka kmeru , mak kodia mermernu-kapkapalli .
lest there be any sexually immoral person or profane person , like Esau , who sold his birthright for one meal . ||| Mitiak kalwiedwed reria totpena yana milira-miliai . Me yanpa miy edonna mhia'wa nana Uplerlawna nnio'oni pa emeka Esau nhi ' nan de . Yoma Esau e na'ol dioinia hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nala , la e garni , de nala e yanullu niodni na nherun nana yamanna tutwu ralamni to ' a .
For you know that even when he afterward desired to inherit the blessing , he was rejected , for he found no place for a change of mind though he sought it diligently with tears . ||| Yana mhi ' emkade yoma miy e miat niohor oleka de , hota la'pa Esau niwra nlernan owa'an tniera-diem della amni , amni nwayotlia . Nko ' a-nkakru nwahak talan pa nlernana ho'mana , nakleh oleka talan wa .
For you have not come to a mountain that might be touched and that burned with fire , and to blackness , darkness , storm , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy edonna mliernana hya ' maka Israel rlernana la Musa lerni , la'pa riwra rrehgoru Uplerlawna . La ' ler de rmai niek la ' wo'ora Sinai , la ' a ai mak klomlomar la . Irlernan to ' a mel'utni-malienni , me anin lawna .
the sound of a trumpet , and the voice of words , which those who heard it begged that not one more word should be spoken to them , ||| Ir e ratlin nana noknoka mak kajorni , me Uplerlawna lirni mak katro'ona . Ler maka Israel re ratlin nana lir de noma rwak de totpena lir de yan memmemna iratlin owa'ana .
for they could not stand that which was commanded , If even an animal touches the mountain , it shall be stoned . ||| Yoma ir ta'en niana rtahan nana lir mak khopna ir de , Niwra , La ' a mak kmormiori hya ' to ' pa nlok la wo'or di , la'pa rimormiori onde hamormiori nmeh ' a to ' a ho'mana , de edonna rsayni owa'ana mere ral meman watu ra rwatliewur wenna .
So fearful was the appearance that Moses said , I am terrified and trembling . ||| Hya ' maka Israel ramkek nana de ramehi-rayon rehia , la ' pede Mus nek de niwra , A'umta'ata me adiwra-dia'ala !
But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God , the heavenly Jerusalem , and to innumerable multitudes of angels , ||| Mere rwaldioinia de la ' miy die , miy mmiai olek la wo'ora Sion , de la ' a Uplerlawna mak kden pa nodi liarni letni maka riwra Yerusalem , mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Miy mmiai pia mpiatrom nana Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu riwnu-halli mak kawoka-kale ' u pua rahe ' i-rahepur rer lia ya'uli-yawed lia Uplerlawna .
to the festal gathering and assembly of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven , to God the Judge of all , to the spirits of just men made perfect , ||| Miy mpiatrom nana Uplerlawna upni-a'nani yanulnullu wokni-le'enu , de it inni-narni makpesiay irhatta maka ha rhorat targ oleka kotni-nanni la ' Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Mmiai pia mior Uplerlawna mak ktorna watghudi la rimormiori nohkeran di wawannu pa mpiatrom nana . Mpiatroma riy mak kmormior lia ' nohkeran di la ' ler ululu , mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , pa dodo'ondi de e rwali olek la mak edon khal kuku ' eti .
to Jesus , the mediator of a new covenant , and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better than that of Abel . ||| Miy mmiai oleka pa miora Yesus inhatta mpiatroma . E ' ed maka kwal lia taliorta-lakatrai lol letgara la ' a nnio ' a warwuar die . Ne E rarni mak khuri die ed mak hota mhia'ar aranmi la , mak edon nora Habel rarni rwatutur wutu . Yoma Habel rarni nwak nekpa rukmua , mere Yesus rarni ed mak kodia pa rwe'er doinia la do ' a-hala .
See that you do n't refuse him who speaks . For if they did n't escape when they refused him who warned on the earth , how much more will we not escape who turn away from him who warns from heaven , ||| La ' hade pede nhioratmi nden la temmi . Yanhi'pa miy edonna mhia'wa nan Uplerlawna lirni . Yoma riy maka edonna kha'wa nan Uplerlawna lirni , maka Musa makdella nohkerna wawannu de nakot nohora , de rlernan meman niukamnu . Pede hota yaho'ma it di , mak katlina Uplerlawna lirni nwatiawu mueman la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . La'pa itahmena tatlin la E ' a , de hota emkameni la ita mormiorni-lewlewanni ? !
whose voice shook the earth then , but now he has promised , saying , Yet once more I will shake not only the earth , but also the heavens . ||| La ' Musa lerni de , Uplerlawna lirni yetanni emekto ' a noha nruru upkarururu pa nohkerna-rai miarna uhunu-ewatni , ewatni-lahwani wolwo'la-wawiainia . Mere la dodo'ondi de E Nano'targa , Ralamni owa'ana , hota A ' g ed maka khi ' a nohkerna-rai miarna , me lyanit marna pa wolwo'la-wawiainia .
This phrase , Yet once more signifies the removing of those things that are shaken , as of things that have been made , that those things which are not shaken may remain . ||| Uplerlawna lirni de Entutga de hota hare honona maka ha rakoki-rayap nian de , hota rawo'la-rawaini me rweyata-rwaniawua , totpena hare honona mak klernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni rmeh ' a ed mak kdena , yoma ta'en niana ha rawo'la nana pa rweyata-rwaniawua .
Therefore , receiving a Kingdom that ca n't be shaken , let 's have grace , through which we serve God acceptably , with reverence and awe , ||| Pede ina-nara , mai pia ta'uli-tawedi Uplerlawna yoma hota tlernana hair warwuaru id la E ' a de mak ta'en niana rweyata-rwaniawua . Ta'uli-tawedi E ' a , yoma kniola tieru-niawur nehla mak emkade ed mak kla ' nana E ralamni . La ' a it ya'ulli-yawedni , kniola tieru-niawur nehlani de tatu tsu'ru-tselma , ta'unni-tamta'at la E ' a .
for our God is a consuming fire . ||| Tatu tsu'ru-tselma , ta'unni-tamta'ata , yoma it Uplerlawanni de Nodi plolli pa Nukmua rimormiori , pa emeknekama ai miaka kamutni-kaki'ira .
Let brotherly love continue . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la ' mormiormi-dardiarmi de idma nhi ' reria kalwiedwed ida totpena emeknekama makpesiay mak kwa'ina-kwanara de lol talanni .
Do n't forget to show hospitality to strangers , for in doing so , some have entertained angels without knowing it . ||| Yana mpiayotlia riy maka kma kwaloha-kwalakta , mere mrieiniana-mia'nana re . Mhioratreria ! La ' ler ululu de riy raplin niana ira e rreiniana Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat la ir romni nayanni .
Remember those who are in bonds , as bound with them , and those who are ill-treated , since you are also in the body . ||| Hota mhioratreria riy maka kden la roma nhio'la ralamni , emekwalima miy erla roma nhio'la de wali totpena mtiulan la ira . Me mhioratreria pa mtiulan walia riy maka klernana nniahora-nniala ' a , de mhiorat nan inonmi emekwalima ira .
Let marriage be held in honor among all , and let the bed be undefiled , but God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterers . ||| Riy honona rtutga ya'unanni-yamta'atni nhiu'ranu-nhielamni la ' a mehlima-marya ' a . De yana muanke ' a onde patke'eni nalira-naliai lola tio'ora . Yoma riy mak khi ' akdeha-aktiahli mehlimni-marya'ani pa ralira-raliai , de hota Uplerlawna orgahani ed mak khudia harella watghudni lokarni . Emkade wali patke ' ida onde muanke ' id mak kakleha hawa mere ralira-raliai liola tio'ora de hota Uplerlawna ed mak kod ir la watghudi lokarni .
Be free from the love of money , content with such things as you have , for he has said , I will in no way leave you , neither will I in any way forsake you . ||| Yan memmemna mhia'ara mormiormi la kupna-kai , re ' a-tniaru , mere ralammi rahepuepur nohora hya ' mak ed olek la tiy miy . Yoma Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a neka Nakot oleka wa , Hota A ' g edonna ghur dioinia o ' a , onde ultarga o ' pa mueh ' a taru .
So that with good courage we say , The Lord is my helper . I will not fear . What can man do to me ? ||| Pede it mana tparan pia tiwra , Orgahi-Orha ' u ne ! O ed maka ktulan rer mai a ' u pede a ' g edonna umta'ata . Hota hya ' ed maka rimormiori nohkerna rhi ' a mai a ' u ? !
Remember your leaders , men who spoke to you the word of God , and considering the results of their conduct , imitate their faith . ||| Yana mhiortaplinga mak khi ' a o'ta-mat tiy miy la ' ler maka itto'or olek de , mak kakot nohor olek tiy miy la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Mimkek samomuoga , kalwieda-paitiot mak ha rhi ' nana la ir mormiorni re , ne mimkek nohora ira pesiayni yala'ani pa mhi ' wal lia .
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday , today , and forever . ||| Mliernohor reri ir pesiayni yala'ani yoma Yesus Kristus edonna Nwali lia ' a-nwali maiya , la ululu memna , la ' dodo'ondi E inhatta pa nodia liarni .
Do n't be carried away by various and strange teachings , for it is good that the heart be established by grace , not by foods , through which those who were so occupied were not benefited . ||| Pede yan memmemna mitlina-mitailla wniatutu-wniaye ' a rupni-rupni mak kodi miy la ' a klierat lawanni . Mere it tala it ihranu ralamni tetema de la Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a , totpena Enaruri-nalai niana it la ' a E kalwiedwedni Nmeh ' a . Yana itsa'ar it aranni la deulu-tatra mak kakot nohora ya'ana-yemnu maka rha'ar ir aranni la pa nodi ir pesiayni la ' a ga ' a . Yoma riy mak klernohora deulu-tatra ululu la ' a ya'ana-yemnu re , edonna rlernana hadomdom pali .
We have an altar from which those who serve the holy tabernacle have no right to eat . ||| Yoma Yesus Nmat pia Namou-nawitna it la it do'oni-halli ralamni . Ne la ' E hihi'ini mak emkade pede emeknekama Enwal lia ita hoihoini-tantianni makden la katri'ana wawannu . Mere riy maka klernohor ma'ta deulu-tatra pa rwahaka yamou-yawitna la ' a do ' a-hala , de edonna rla ' a rieknenni pa rre'ela rkamit nan oke'ela ' hoihoi-tantiani makden la katri'ana wawannu mak it gahani de .
For the bodies of those animals , whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high priest as an offering for sin , are burned outside of the camp . ||| La ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a romni Kemah mak ululu de , pipi-duma rarni maka ha rala pa ra rwahla do ' a-hala , de imam o'ta lawanni nodia la Geni Momuou-Witwitan Memna la do ' a-hala . Mere pipi-dum de inonni mak kmati olekwa de ra'ala pa rtunu-rharna la leta to'orni .
Therefore Jesus also , that he might sanctify the people through his own blood , suffered outside of the gate . ||| Pa hota emekwalima Yesus . E ' orgahani rarni de ed maka ra rkuhi-rho'ora E mutnu-rahanu re do'oni-halli . Mere E nek de Nler la kropna-krieutu la'pa Nmat lia leta to'orni .
Let 's therefore go out to him outside of the camp , bearing his reproach . ||| La ' hade pede mai pia tlola E talla warwuarnu mak hota kod it pa tlernan walia E yamolli-yama'ani emekwalima Enlernana la ' a leta tio'orni .
For we do n't have here an enduring city , but we seek that which is to come . ||| Yoma mai nohkeran di de hota it edonna tlernana geni-tiena mak kden rer pia nodi liarni . Mere itsa'ar it aranni la ' a geni-tien mak hota kmai .
Through him , then , let 's offer up a sacrifice of praise to God continually , that is , the fruit of lips which proclaim allegiance to his name . ||| Onnila Yesus Nla ' makpolu-makwak la Uplerlawna la it rerieini , pede itlernan talan pa ta'uli-tawedi Uplerlawna . Pede mai pia ita'uli-tawed rer mamainia Uplerlawna kotni-nanni . Yoma ta'uli-tawedi Uplerlawna de emeknekama itsoi-ttania prehena-mau la Uplerlawna , emeka riy mak kwayow nohora E ' a emeknekama ir Uplerlawanni .
But do n't forget to be doing good and sharing , for with such sacrifices God is well pleased . ||| Yana mhiortaplinga pa mpiehwa-mliakat la plol wawna me mira ' a-mipalga la rimormior wialmi , yoma wniehwa-liakta mak emkade , de emeknekama itsoi-ttania patuini-paro'ona mak kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni .
Obey your leaders and submit to them , for they watch on behalf of your souls , as those who will give account , that they may do this with joy and not with groaning , for that would be unprofitable for you . ||| Mliernohora mak khi ' a o'ta-mat la miy lirni-tunnu , ne mhiu'ru-mhielam la re . Yoma hota ir nanpena er mak kakot nohora ir tulanni-re'eni tiy miy lia ' Uplerlawna . Miatu mitlina-mitailla ira , totpa hota ir mana rtulla-rkar die ral toto ' a ralamni tetema , mere la'pa miy edonna mitlina-mitailla ira , de hota ir ralamni edonna ramtemna me rkar die edon naplola pa hota kniarni re edon nodia unut tiy miy .
Pray for us , for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience , desiring to live honorably in all things . ||| Msiumbain mai ami . Yoma amatga de amhi ' hya ' to ' de ndella plollol wawannu me ampak de hota emkade pa nodi liarni .
I strongly urge you to do this , that I may be restored to you sooner . ||| Awuak lilili-mamuau tiy miy , totpena msiumbainia a lia Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu de mpiak totpena edon nalo'on wali ne , Enodia a ' pua a tiy miy die .
Now may the God of peace , who brought again from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep with the blood of an eternal covenant , our Lord Jesus , ||| Uplerlawna Namori-nalewn oleka Itmatromni Yesus la ' a matmiati ralamni . La ' a matmiatni de pede Enhi ' oleka Makodi Duma O'ta Lawanni la ' a ita mak ha riwra E dumni ita . Ne E rarni mak katiowur de wali pia ed maka karur niana nnio ' a mak kodi liarni , mak Uplerlawna Nano'targa la mai ita . Pa awuak de Uplerlawna mak kala kalwiedni-paitiotni ,
make you complete in every good work to do his will , working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight , through Jesus Christ , to whom be the glory forever and ever . Amen . ||| hota E ' ed mak kala himimni-rere'eni , rurni-laini hya ' to'ola miy totpena la ' hya ' to ' maka ha mhi ' a de nlola E ralamni me totpa it hononita tla ' riy maka E ralamni nala , lola Yesus Kristus tutulanni-rere'eni . Mai pia tlilili-tmamuau ta'uli-tawedi E ' la ' dodo'ondi pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
But I exhort you , brothers , endure the word of exhortation , for I have written to you in few words . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , awuak tiy miy die mtiulan pa mitlin samomuoga a yano ' u-ya'atu ri , yoma a hortu di tiy miy die edonna nawerna-naplahwa .
Know that our brother Timothy has been freed , with whom , if he comes shortly , I will see you . ||| Agiwra ukot wali tiy miy die totpa miat niohora de , ita mutwualli Timotius nlergot olek la roma nhio'la ralamni . Ne la'pa edon nalo'on wali pia e nma nwahak a ' u , de hota agor rewre'wa pa mla mtomar tiy miy .
Greet all of your leaders and all the saints . The Italians greet you . ||| Hota mikot nohora a kalwie'du la miy o'tami-matmi re honona me la ' walia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re honona . Me mliernan walia it inni-narni , amni-hyalli makden la Itali re kalwiedni .
Grace be with you all . Amen . ||| Pena twak la Orgahi-Orha ' a pa Nala ra'ani-pallu nanaloi-nanatar nan miy hononmi .
James , a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ , to the twelve tribes which are in the Dispersion , Greetings . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Yahudi miy mak kler olek la Uplerlawna mutnu pepanni-taurnu ralamni , makpeha-maklawan la ' a noheri woru-lyanti nayanni . A ' di de Yakowsi , awuak kalwieda-paitiota la miy hononmi . A ' g ed mak kre'ela khi ' a hopopan la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu me arie'ela ghima-rie ' a lidna-tiauru nohora Itmatromni Yesus Kristus .
Count it all joy , my brothers , when you fall into various temptations , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy hononmi . La'pa mormiormi-dardiarmi rler la kropanni-krieutnu polpuol inni-wakwak amni , de yana ralammi nmawla mere mihepuepru nohora .
knowing that the testing of your faith produces endurance . ||| Yoma unut lawn olek hade tiy miy wia . Ina-nara miatga oleka , de la'pa itler la kropna-krieutu mere emkade ho'mana it pesiayni narur lia Orgahi-Orha ' a , de hota yeher to ' pa itatu tatahan it ralamni la kropna-krieutu polpuol ina-wakwak ama hya ' to'owa .
Let endurance have its perfect work , that you may be perfect and complete , lacking in nothing . ||| Ne hota la ' a tatahan ralamni nek emkadi , la hohoni de hota itla ' riy mak kden la plol wawna , de de riy mak kler la plolli-mneheni la hya'-hya ' to'owa .
But if any of you lacks wisdom , let him ask of God , who gives to all liberally and without reproach , and it will be given to him . ||| Mere la'pa riy id tiy miy die naplin niohora hota nwehwa-nlakta emkameni la ' kropna-krieutu ralamni , de mikot la pa e nwak nek talla la Uplerlawna . Ne plol toto ' pa hota Uplerlawna Nala o'ta-kriahlu la e ' a , yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kala himima-rere ' a la he'-he ' to ' a , lola Uplerlawna ralma plele'erni pede edon Nawenan la riy mak kwak la E ' a .
But let him ask in faith , without any doubting , for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea , driven by the wind and tossed . ||| Hornama riy meni mak kwak la E ' de , de pesiayni namtemna . Yoma mak pesiayni edon kamtemna , de emekneka yo'or tah ' i lawna maka anni nod lia'-nod miaiya .
For that man should n't think that he will receive anything from the Lord . ||| Riy mak emkade , de yana nwarora de hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nwahla polpuollu-wakwakni ,
He is a double-minded man , unstable in all his ways . ||| yoma riy de emekwalima damdiamu kleh ga'ara pede ralamni worworga .
Let the brother in humble circumstances glory in his high position , ||| Ina-nara makpesiay miy , mak kakleha-kaplara de yana ralammi rmawla , mere mihepru yoma Uplerlawna Nwalir nian miy pia mhi ' E limni-rorni .
and the rich , in that he is made humble , because like the flower in the grass , he will pass away . ||| Ne makpesiay mak kre ' a-ktaru , de mihepru yoma Uplerlawna Nhi ' totpena miy edon mhia'ara aranmi la re'emi-tniarmi , mere mhia'ara aranmi tetema la Uplerlawna . Yoma hota Uplerlawna orgahi ed maka kalernia makre ' a-ktaru miy genmi . Mak kre ' a-ktaru re hota emolmolla wewan deutu mak kapi'ira .
For the sun arises with the scorching wind and withers the grass , and the flower in it falls , and the beauty of its appearance perishes . So the rich man will also fade away in his pursuits . ||| Yoma la'pa lera nhit panpahna de wewan de hota napliau , ne deutnu mana napi'ir doin nohora samounu . La ' walia makre ' a-maktaru re hota rler la matmiati-molmuolu la ' ler maka ir er ma'ta la wniadakanni ralamni .
Blessed is a person who endures temptation , for when he has been approved , he will receive the crown of life which the Lord promised to those who love him . ||| Mak katehra nan ralamni la ' a kropna-krieutu ralamni , de hota nler la unut lawna . Yoma la'pa nlewan la yatehra ralma la ' a kropna-krieutu re hota e nlernana mormiori-dardiari maka Uplerlawna Nano'targ oleka wa la ' a riy meni-meni maka ralamni nden rer lia Uplerlawna . Riy de hota emolmolan nekama mak kawlari ida mak kler ulu la ' honi pede nlernana siew de .
Let no man say when he is tempted , I am tempted by God , for God ca n't be tempted by evil , and he himself tempts no one . ||| La'pa riy ida nler la yapi ' u-yaga ' u , yan niwra yapi ' u-yaga ' die ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna . Yoma ta'en niana Uplerlawna Natlina-natailla ' yapi ' u-yaga ' u yoma Uplerlawna edonna nora yatyatni-halalli rla ' lir ida pa Ntota-nwudia riy ida .
But each one is tempted when he is drawn away by his own lust and enticed . ||| Mere hota yapi ' u-yaga ' die nwatiawu riy de ihranu ralamni . Yoma wniaror yatyata ed olek la . Ne la'pa riy de niwra nlernohora wniaror yatyat de , hade de emolmolan nekama i'n mak kiwra nte'la la ' ainiara mere naplin niek la ema rhewra kenna .
Then the lust , when it has conceived , bears sin . The sin , when it is full grown , produces death . ||| Ne la'pa tlernohora yatyata-halal mak kden olek la it ihranu ralamni de , de hota itler la do ' a-hala ralamni . Ne la'pa do ' a-hal de na'ona-naga'ar la it ihranu ralamni , demade nod it la matmiati-molmuolu ralamni .
Do n't be deceived , my beloved brothers . ||| Yan memmemna i'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu mak kden rer lia a ih'ru-ralmu mpiaror mak edon kaplola .
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above , coming down from the Father of lights , with whom can be no variation nor turning shadow . ||| Yoma hya ' maka itlernana kalwiedweda la'pa ra ' a-palu honona re , hade nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha , maka Uplerlawna mak kwoili-knatria , demade orgahi ed mak kalernia . E ' ed maka kwahi ' a-kayapia lera-wolla la ' lyanti . E ' de de Uplerlawna maka nhiolli-lietni ndel to'ola genni , pede edon emeka lera-wolla pa nernu-nha'ata .
Of his own will he gave birth to us by the word of truth , that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures . ||| Nlernohora E ralma-rior wamueheni , pede Nhopan pa rakot nohora Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni mai ita , totpa la ' talan emkade pede hota Nhi ' itla ' E a'nani . Totpena hota itlernan gen miak katulu-karehi la ' a ha mormiori honona maka Ha Nakoki-nayap niana re .
So , then , my beloved brothers , let every man be swift to hear , slow to speak , and slow to anger , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali maka kden reria la a ralmu , mhioratrer hadille . Miatu mitlina fiekta mere yana pleta-plet pa miltieri onde miwenna .
for the anger of man does n't produce the righteousness of God . ||| Yoma la ' riy mak kawenna de , edonna nhi ' a-nyap tiarga kalwiedwedni mak kla ' a Uplerlawna ralamni .
Therefore , putting away all filthiness and overflowing of wickedness , receive with humility the implanted word , which is able to save your souls . ||| La ' hade pede do ' a-hala honona , la'pa hya'-hya ' to'owa mak kpa'eini-kpahala it ralamni de , tsopliala walli . Yana tatulu-tapetna it inonni mere mai pia it tala ihru ploi-ralma ple'era pa treiniana-ta'nana Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Ha Nohor taru-ntamin tar lia it ralamni , yoma lira-tunu maka Uplerlawna orgahi Nala re , de e npapan targa ruri-lai mak hota nal it la mori-lewna .
But be doers of the word , and not only hearers , deluding your own selves . ||| Ne mliernohora hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nakota . Yan mitlin to ' a Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mere edon mliernohora , yoma hota la'pa edon mliernohora , de miy mi'akal to ' a inon wamuehemi .
For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer , he is like a man looking at his natural face in a mirror , ||| Yoma riy maka katlina Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mere edonna nlernohora de emeknekama riy mak kamkek gaini la totmemi .
for he sees himself , and goes away , and immediately forgets what kind of man he was . ||| Namkek toto ' a mere nla'awa demade nhortaplinga rupni .
But he who looks into the perfect law of freedom and continues , not being a hearer who forgets but a doer of the work , this man will be blessed in what he does . ||| Mere Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni naplele'era ne nala ruri-lai na npapna , totpena na nwe'er doini rimormiori la ' do ' a-hala ralamni . Ne riy maka edon nhoratdoin hya ' maka natlin oleka la de , ne nwaror reri-nwalai reri samomuowa pa nlernohora deulu-tatra re , de hota riy de ed maka klernana Uplerlawna ra'ani-pallu .
If anyone among you thinks himself to be religious while he does n't bridle his tongue , but deceives his heart , this man 's religion is worthless . ||| La'pa riy ida nwarora de , e ' de riy mak kape'el la kniola tieru-niawur nehla la Uplerlawna , mere edonna natiak namni wnialawarni , de riy de orgahani enakal nan owa'ana inon wamueheni . Lia ' a kreini de nwal lia hamamuamua .
Pure religion and undefiled before our God and Father is this , to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction , and to keep oneself unstained by the world . ||| Agama wniatutnu yala'ani mak kaplol meman la geni la ' a Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de yamkekni , de totpa itsima-tre ' a la a'na riy patyatni mak kakleha-kaplara . Me tatu tatiak reri kalwiedweda totpena yana tlernohora rimormiori nohkerna ralma-riorni .
My brothers , do n't hold the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ with partiality . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy , miy mpiesiay oleka la Orgahi Yesus Kristus mak kodia Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni hititni-repreparni . La ' hade pede yan memmemna mpiar la lirmi-yatmi pa mniaheri-mniahelta rimormior wialmi .
For if a man with a gold ring , in fine clothing , comes into your synagogue , and a poor man in filthy clothing also comes in , ||| Yoma hota riy makre ' a-maktaru ida hitita-reprepar nohora lelli-kdielli hewewta-naniayarni pa nmai lia yawoka-yale ' u , ne edon nalo'on wali ne riy makakleha ida nmai , die nnairia pritni-phiaratni .
and you pay special attention to him who wears the fine clothing and say , Sit here in a good place , and you tell the poor man , Stand there , or Sit by my footstool ||| Pede hota miy mhiu'ru-mhielma riy mak kamrehi-kamda'ar nohora naniayarni de . Noma mikot la miwra , Mmuai lia mtatangen dilla . Mere hota mikot la makakleha-kaplar de miwra , Hoi , muprir niek la hande onde , Muwiatru la a la'ku onni .
have n't you shown partiality among yourselves , and become judges with evil thoughts ? ||| Nhioli-liet mak emkade , de miy mhieri-mhielta rimormiori wialmi me miy milernu-miha ' a rimormiori de mniairia ralma-rior yatyata .
Listen , my beloved brothers . Did n't God choose those who are poor in this world to be rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom which he promised to those who love him ? ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden la a ralmu , mhioratreria . Miat memn oleka de , riy mak kakleha-kaplara la nohkerna wawannu di , de hota Uplerlawna Nwaliria pa nwal lia mak ktarga pesiay miak karuri . Riy mak emkare , de hota rhor temna la Uplerlawna mutnu mak kor rewre'wa E ' a , ne mak Enodi plolli la pa emeka Ray , yoma emekneka hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa la ' a riy maka ralamni kden rer lia E ' a .
But you have dishonored the poor man . Do n't the rich oppress you and personally drag you before the courts ? ||| Mere miy die mpialdioinia pa mipolu-miliella riy mak kakleha-kaplara . Mere miatg memn oleka , de makre ' a-maktaru ri , ir er maka kutni-kdahla miy me ir er maka ka'ita miy lia watghudi gaini .
Do n't they blaspheme the honorable name by which you are called ? ||| Ne hya ' wali die , ir er maka kamola-kama ' a Yesus kotni-nanni ya'ulli-yawedni . Ne miy di de Uplerlawna gahani miy .
However , if you fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture , You shall love your neighbor as yourself , you do well . ||| La'pa mhi ' oleka deulu-tatra mak karehi , maka e rakot nohora la ' a Puk lawna ralamni , de emkadilla lirni , Mtiulla-msiaynia mira ' a-mipal wualia rimormiori wialmu de emekwalima miy e mimkek inon wamuehemi , de mhi ' nan oleka plollolli .
But if you show partiality , you commit sin , being convicted by the law as transgressors . ||| Mere la'pa miy mhieri-mhielta rimormiori wialmi la ' a yamkek matmi , de mhi ' oleka do ' a-hal la inonmi . Ne deulu-tatra Uplerlawna niwra miy er maka kadunti-kawetria deulu-tatra .
For whoever keeps the whole law , and yet stumbles in one point , he has become guilty of all . ||| Riy mak khelkiai-khakpera Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni id neka , de emekneka riy maka kadunti-kawetria deulu-tatra re honona .
For he who said , Do not commit adultery , also said , Do not commit murder . Now if you do not commit adultery but do murder , you have become a transgressor of the law . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna ed maka Nakot niwra , Yana milira-miliai . Ne E ' mana Niwra , Yana mpiunu-mpienna . Pa la'pa hota miy edonna milira-miliai mere miy mpiunu-mpienna , de emekwalima miy e midunti-miwetri olek walia Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni .
So speak and so do as men who are to be judged by the law of freedom . ||| La ' hade pede la ' a ltiermi-tianmi , wniehwami-liakatmi , hihi'imi-yapyapmi re honona , de mhi ' a-myapia emolmolla riy mak hota Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara Nlernohora Yesus Kristus deullu-tatarni maka ha ra rwe'er doinia rimormiori .
For judgment is without mercy to him who has shown no mercy . Mercy triumphs over judgment . ||| Yoma hota la ' a riy maka edon kat niohora sniayni la rimormior wialli la ' dodo'ondi neka , de hota Uplerlawna edon Ntutga sniayanni la , la ' a ler maka Nhudi-npara riy honona la ' a watghudi lokarni . Mere la'pa riy id mana natu ntutga sniayanni la rimormior wialli , de hota Uplerlawna Ntutga sniayanni la ' e ' a .
What good is it , my brothers , if a man says he has faith , but has no works ? Can faith save him ? ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , pe'el walia pa riy ida niwra e de riy maka kpesiay id e ' a . Mere e ' edonna ntutga la e wniehwani-liakatni ? ! Hota pesiay miak emkade ta'en niana nodia it la mormiori-dardiari toh !
And if a brother or sister is naked and in lack of daily food , ||| Emekwalima la'pa ina-nara makpesiay ida nakleha lawra-raini . Ne e ' nekpa ya'ana-yemannu nek de kawawa la lera-lera .
and one of you tells them , Go in peace . Be warmed and filled , yet you did n't give them the things the body needs , what good is it ? ||| Hya ' ed maka kperkun pede mikot la miwra , Kalwieda tiy o ' a muora ya'anmu-yemanmu nora naniayarmu re . Hota miala hya ' a wniaror pa mikota lir mak emkade la ' e ' a , mere miy niek de edonna miala hya ' maka ena'an pa namoria aranni ? !
Even so faith , if it has no works , is dead in itself . ||| Emkade wal lia pesiay . La'pa edonna tsi ' a-tyapia kalwiedweda pa talharia it pesiayni , de it pesiayni de nakleh perkuna .
Yes , a man will say , You have faith , and I have works . Show me your faith without works , and I will show you my faith by my works . ||| Matialo'onama riy ida niwra , La ' doma wniarorni de riy er rha'ar to ' aranni la pesiayni . Ne dom to ' mana e rahnia'ar to'ola wniehwa-liakta . Hota a ' g ed maka kakwiet nana yatian de , Mtiut tieka la mai a ' u , emkamenila tamkeka riy maka ktarga pesiay mere edon rtutga la nhiolli-lietni ne hota atiut wal lia nhioli-lieta pa itat niohora pesiay .
You believe that God is one . You do well . The demons also believe-and shudder . ||| Miy mpiesiaya la Uplerlawna de Ntuin to'ola riy ida toh ? ! Pesiay mak emkade plol toto ' a . Mere hegana-kawnu yatni-rha'ani mana rpesiay emkade wal piede ramta'at Uplerlawna , de rdiwra-rda'ala .
But do you want to know , vain man , that faith apart from works is dead ? ||| Miy mpiodku-mpiadku me ! Hota hya ' owa'an pa rakot owa'an tiy miy totpa miatga , de pesiay die etla hanmeni , de nhioli-lieta ilu-yehwa nlernohor reria ? ! Pesiay maka edon rhi ' a-ryapia nohora nwal lia hamamuamua toh ? !
Was n't Abraham our father justified by works , in that he offered up Isaac his son on the altar ? ||| Mimkek to'ola Abraham , it upni-tgarni de . Uplerlawna Netlia de e ' de riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni , yoma la ' a nhiolli-lietni la ' a lera nal a'nani Isak pa nhi ' a la hoihoi-tantiani toh !
You see that faith worked with his works , and by works faith was perfected . ||| La ' hadi de nayamkek meman mai ita , de Abraham pesiayni de talanwalli ilu-wniehwa totpena yana naheri-nawalia . Ne , ilu-wniehwa mak klernohor reria Abraham pesiayni , de hade ed mak kariei pede pesiayni de plol toto ' la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
So the Scripture was fulfilled which says , Abraham believed God , and it was accounted to him as righteousness , and he was called the friend of God . ||| Me Abraham illu-wniehwani la ' ler maka enal a'nani , de nlernohor memna Puka lirni mak emkadilla , Abraham npesiaya Uplerlawna , ne la ' a pesiayni pa Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana pa emeka riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Hade pede rwet la Abraham de , de Uplerlawna heiwialli .
You see then that by works a man is justified , and not only by faith . ||| Pede miatga de naplol meman la ' lera-mela ri , de Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana rimormiori pa emeka riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni yoma hya ' maka riy rhi ' a-ryapia , de edonna rtut tio ' pesiayni .
In the same way , was n't Rahab the prostitute also justified by works when she received the messengers and sent them out another way ? ||| Ina-nara , tamkek wal lia Rahab , patke ' yat de . Emekwali Abraham , de Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana Rahab pa emeka riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , yoma la ' a nhiolli-lietni mak kaplola la ' ler maka enade ' a riy Israel mak kmai pia klina-kmata noha Kana'ana , ne nal talan la ir pa rmori-rlewna .
For as the body apart from the spirit is dead , even so faith apart from works is dead . ||| Ina-nara , a'ukot olek la ' a hare honona totpa miatga , de emeka inon mak kakleha aranni nmati , emkade walia pesiay miaka edonna rhi ' a-ryap niohora , de pesiaya mak kwal lia hamamuamua .
Let not many of you be teachers , my brothers , knowing that we will receive heavier judgment . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy hononmi mitlina . Awuak totpa riy harahu lia ' a miy die , yana mlia ' tungkuru . Miatg oleka de , he ' a la ' tungkuru de hota Uplerlawna Nhudia la ' watghudi lokarni , nareh miemna mak edonna kla ' tungkuru .
For we all stumble in many things . Anyone who does n't stumble in word is a perfect person , able to bridle the whole body also . ||| La'pa it hononita , de nhi'inde tsi ' mak edon kaplola , mere riy mak edonna khi ' do ' a-kyap hial la ' a wniareini-wniahaurnu de , hota riy de nden la plol wawna me e ' ed maka katu kodia inonni la haneknek wawannu .
Indeed , we put bits into the horses ' mouths so that they may obey us , and we guide their whole body . ||| Itala kuda ida pa itsi ' a la yawalliohora . La'pa itkeni tali la kuda nurnu totpena nlernohor ita , de emekwalima it todi plolli la kud de inonni tetema . Mere tali nek de kuku ' a .
Behold , the ships also , though they are so big and are driven by fierce winds , are yet guided by a very small rudder , wherever the pilot desires . ||| Tamkek la kapli ida . De ha matmiat liawna id hade , me anin lawna nod lia'-nod miaiya , mere yormudi ed maka na ntorreria kapil de ulanni pa kawehwa reria kapil de gaini , kennama ulanni kuku ' a .
So the tongue is also a little member , and boasts great things . See how a small fire can spread to a large forest ! ||| Tamkek wal lia ' orun lawna-wewan lawna . Mere ai kwiar ku ' ida nmor die , hota nlomar doin momuoga la . Hare honona re emekwalima it namni . It namni de kuku ' selma mere nran tutulu it inonni la hya ' maka hota kod it la lira-tunga matmiati-molmuolu .
And the tongue is a fire . The world of iniquity among our members is the tongue , which defiles the whole body , and sets on fire the course of nature , and is set on fire by Gehenna . ||| It namni nwalawar de emekwalia ai wnialawarni . La ' it inonni di , de it namni de ed maka kpoti-kaduw nana yatyatni-halalli la ' it inonni tetema me la ' a it mormiorni-dardiarni tetema la ' noh keran di wawannu . La'pa takot yatyatni la mak katlina la it wniahaurnu , de emeka ai liali makden la naraka wikni de hota nram doin momuowua .
For every kind of animal , bird , creeping thing , and sea creature is tamed , and has been tamed by mankind , ||| Yoma hota la ' a hamormiori riwnu-halli honona maka klihir matmata-khaw riarara re , me onu-ma'nu , mak knema-ktai , mak kawrika-kawriai , me i'na-ya'ana mana rimormiori namar niana re , ne hota rmar nian owa'ana .
but nobody can tame the tongue . It is a restless evil , full of deadly poison . ||| Mere hota la ' it namni de , riy id mana edonna namar niana . Emeka maka klihir matmat-khaw riarara , rlihira-rnaiya ya'ana , de ta'en niana rimormiori nodi plolli la , ne emolmolannek walima niy ida nho'owa , de hota riy de nmati , it namni de nodi riy lia yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani .
With it we bless our God and Father , and with it we curse men who are made in the image of God . ||| It namni nekpa itala pa ta'uli-tawedia Orgahi-Orha ' a it Amlawanni de . Mere hota it namni de nekpa ita tlokra-tsautia it rimormior wialli , maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayap niana de emekwali E ' a .
Out of the same mouth comes blessing and cursing . My brothers , these things ought not to be so . ||| It namni de na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna , demade nwaldioinia pa nlokra-nhaut rira . Ina-nara , la ' a plollolli de yana tsi ' emkade .
Does a spring send out from the same opening fresh and bitter water ? ||| Mimkek teka la ger ormata ida , de e nopilgota ger or mi'na nora ger mahana ? !
Can a fig tree , my brothers , yield olives , or a vine figs ? Thus no spring yields both salt water and fresh water . ||| La ' a kar ona ida de edonna nawo ' a korma . Ne lokrahi ida de edonna nawo ' a kar wo ' a . Opil tah ' i edonna nopilgota ger wo'ora turnu . Emkade walia , edon naplola pa it namni de na'uli-nawedi Uplerlawna nhor nioka nlokra-nhautia it rimormior wialli .
Who is wise and understanding among you ? Let him show by his good conduct that his deeds are done in gentleness of wisdom . ||| La'pa mliernana riy id tiy miy die mak kiwra , A ' di de mak katu , mak ktarga kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou , de mikot la pa ntutga wniehwa-liakta kalwieda-paitiota me natu nlol yawa pa nhu'ru-nhelma rimormior wialli totpa hihi'ini-yapyapni plol toto ' pa emeka riy mak ktarga kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou .
But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your heart , do n't boast and do n't lie against the truth . ||| Mere la'pa riy de ralamni namehra namkeka riy doma samounu me ntota-nwudi tio'ola inon wamueheni , de yana na'akla pa nwarehi inonni la mutwualli niwra e ' de mak katu .
This wisdom is not that which comes down from above , but is earthly , sensual , and demonic . ||| Lira-yatu mak emkare de hade edonna nwatiawu Ilyamou-Watyatoha mere ha nwatiawua nohkerna wawannu me nko ' i nana nohkerna gahani pa nler teman la ralam yatyatni maka hegana amlawanni karkiarni enni .
For where jealousy and selfish ambition are , there is confusion and every evil deed . ||| Yoma la'pa riy ralamni namehra yoma ramkeka riy doma samounu me rtota-rwud tio'ola ir inon wamueheni , de hota nodi niek riy lia riwtu-hora kokokna-rariarni me nhioli-lieta yatyata-halala .
But the wisdom that is from above is first pure , then peaceful , gentle , reasonable , full of mercy and good fruits , without partiality , and without hypocrisy . ||| Mere riy maka kwarora-kwalai niana lira-yatu mak kwatiawu Uplerlawna , de hota mormiorni de namou-nawitan la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Ne riy de mana ralma ploi-plele'era la rimormior wialli pede edon nawenan taru mere nor rimormior wialli nkalwiedweda . E ' mana natu natlina-nataili me hota yehwani mnapla pede natlin la riy dom to ' a wniarorni-wnialaini . Hota natu ntut reri ralam kalwiedni , me nhima-nre ' reria e rimormior wialli . Ne edon nniaheri-nniahelta rimormior wialli onde ntukla-nwahla riy .
Now the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace . ||| Emolmolan nekama mak kawuli-katniamni nape'el pa nawuli-natniamnia la ' a nhyi'ini , hota nlernana rieiki-wnio'ora , de hota emkade wal lia ' riy maka kwahaka kalwieda-paitiota la rimormior wialli , de hota riy rahu rlernohora e ' pede ir nek de rhi ' samomuou lia ir rimormior wialli .
Where do wars and fightings among you come from ? Do n't they come from your pleasures that war in your members ? ||| Ina-nara mitlina . Miatg oleka de , mihuri-miwo'ora , mpiadupla-mpiahia'ala onnila mpiaror nohora nohkeran di wniarorni-wnialaini mak edon nora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni ramneneha !
You lust , and do n't have . You murder and covet , and ca n't obtain . You fight and make war . You do n't have , because you do n't ask . ||| Hota mpiaror pa mia'ala , mere taken niana mia ' nana noma mpiarora wniunu-wnienna . Mpiaror nana pa mliernana hyoni-hyani re ' a-tniaru mere miy edonna mia ' nana hya ' maka ha mihaka . Noma mihuri-miwo'or nohora pa mpiadupla-mpiahia'ala . Hare honona de hota edonna mliernana yoma edonna mpiak harella Uplerlawna .
You ask , and do n't receive , because you ask with wrong motives , so that you may spend it on your pleasures . ||| Ne la'pa mpiak olek ho'mana , hota edon mliernan walia yoma wniaror maka ha mniair pa me mpiak de , nhala . Hya ' maka ha mpiak de , de mtiot nan to ' inon wamuehemi .
You adulterers and adulteresses , do n't you know that friendship with the world is hostility toward God ? Whoever therefore wants to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God . ||| Miy die edonna mdien rer lia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Miy e miat memn oleka de , la'pa miy e mpiapan rer lia nohkerna , de mlia ' Uplerlawna arwalli toh ? ! Pede la'pa he ' mak kulit rer lia nohkerna , de e ' ed maka ka'aw niana Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu pa nora ra'ara .
Or do you think that the Scripture says in vain , The Spirit who lives in us yearns jealously ? ||| Puklawna lirni niwra Nhiw Lululli maka Uplerlawna Nalernia la it wawannu , de Nahmen memna itlernohora nohkerna gahani , mere itden rer tio ' E ' a . Yana mpiarora de Puka lirni de edon naplola !
But he gives more grace . Therefore it says , God resists the proud , but gives grace to the humble . ||| Mere Uplerlawna Nala ruri-lai totpa Nreh niana it ihranu-ralamni yatni-halli . La ' hade pede e rhorat tar wualia la Puklawna ralamni de , Uplerlawna Nwayotlia riy mak katulu-kapetna , mere Nwaldioinia pa Nara ' a-napalga riy mak katu khu'ru-khelma .
Be subject therefore to God . Resist the devil , and he will flee from you . ||| Hade emkade pede mhiu'ru-mhielma Uplerlawna pa mliernohora E nnio'oni-niatnu . La ' talan emkade pede miy edon mliernohora hegana amlawanni ne hota hegana honona re rawlar dioini miy lia .
Draw near to God , and he will draw near to you . Cleanse your hands , you sinners . Purify your hearts , you double-minded . ||| Mriehgor rer lia Uplerlawna ne E ' mana hota Nrehgor rer tiy miy . Mhio ' a-mhiaiya limmi la do'omi-halmi ralamni , me mimoga ihrami-ralammi la ' a mak kawu ' u-kahana , yoma miy ralammi worworga la miy pesiaymi .
Lament , mourn , and weep . Let your laughter be turned to mourning and your joy to gloom . ||| Mlier toto ' meman la ralma kwali , ne mkio ' a-mkiakur nohora pa mipolu-mitniani . Miy hepurmi re rwal lia knio ' a-kniakru , ne yamuki-yahepurmi re mana rwal lia lui-nuhru .
Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord , and he will exalt you . ||| Mhiu'ru-mhielam la Orgahi-Orha ' a totpena E ' ed maka kran miy lia gen tiutulu .
Do n't speak against one another , brothers . He who speaks against a brother and judges his brother , speaks against the law and judges the law . But if you judge the law , you are not a doer of the law but a judge . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali hononmi mitlina . Yana idma napolu-naliella ida onde idma nwaghala ida , onnila miy hononmi re de makpesiay rewre'wa miy . La'pa hameni napolu-naliella ida me idma nwaghal ida , de emekwalima e ' ed mak kaliella me kwaghala Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni . Hade nnia'eratni de , miy edonna mliernohora deulu-tatra re , mere miy er mak kodi plolli la deulu-tatra .
Only one is the lawgiver , who is able to save and to destroy . But who are you to judge another ? ||| La ' a plollolli de riy memeh ' de ed maka kodi plolli pa Ntorna watghudi la rimormiori hononita . E ' ed mak kala deulu-tatra me mak khudi-kpara rimormiori ita . E ' de Uplerlawna mak kodia plolli pa Namori-nalewna me Nodi plolli pa Nala matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia rimormiori la ai mormiori ralamni naraka . Hya ' miy piede , miy miwra mpiaghala rimormiori wialmi ? !
Come now , you who say , Today or tomorrow let 's go into this city and spend a year there , trade , and make a profit . ||| I'nu-na'ru a'mu-hya'lu makla ' makwadakna miy , nhi'inde miwra , La ' ler di onde repra de hota amla ' a leta ida ne hota amden nek la hande pa anin penpuenu ida totpena ampahak untu . Mitlin pa a'ukota .
Yet you do n't know what your life will be like tomorrow . For what is your life ? For you are a vapor that appears for a little time and then vanishes away . ||| Hya ' maka hota ha mliernana la repra , de miy niek de hota miplin niohora . Miy emolmolla ai miokla mak kmokla-kmahu mere tamkek owa'an de nmol tietema .
For you ought to say , If the Lord wills , we will both live , and do this or that . ||| La ' a plollolli de mikot emkadilla , La'pa Orgahi-Orha ' a orgahani ralamni nal am die , hota ammormiori plalahwa pa amhi ' a hanek-harahu wuawannu .
But now you glory in your boasting . All such boasting is evil . ||| Mere miy mitulu-mipetna inonmi . Mitulu-mipetna inonmi de nhal wa .
To him therefore who knows to do good and does n't do it , to him it is sin . ||| Ina-nara a'ukot tiy miy die , he ' mak kat niohora hya ' mak kaplola ri , mere edon nhi ' nana-nyap niana de , e ' de e nler olek la do ' a-hala ralamni .
Come now , you rich , weep and howl for your miseries that are coming on you . ||| Mak kre ' a-ktaru miy , mtia'wa tlinmi la a li'ru ri . A'ukot tiy miy totpa mkio ' a-mkiakru mipolu-mitniani yoma hota mlier la kropna-krieut lawna mak kodia miy lia lui-nuhru .
Your riches are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten . ||| Re'emi-tniarmi rwal lia gepgehpani-taltia'lani . Naniayarmi re de erieri na'an ahorga .
Your gold and your silver are corroded , and their corrosion will be for a testimony against you and will eat your flesh like fire . You have laid up your treasure in the last days . ||| Lelmi-mahami de rakarte ' momuou , ne la ' ler mak hota Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara rimormiori la watghudi lokarni de re'emi-tniarmi mak rakarte ' momuou re , hota rtutrier niohora miy pia mlier la niukum lalawna . Hota mlier la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani pa emolmolan nekama hya'-hya ' to ' maka ai na'an doinia la . Mkio ' a-mkiakru yoma miy e miniutin targa re'emi-tniarmi pa ma mpieiya ler mak kiwa kte'ela lera noha niatni de .
Behold , the wages of the laborers who mowed your fields , which you have kept back by fraud , cry out , and the cries of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of Armies . ||| Miy miak edonna kpairia rira liwatnu-odawni la ' a nhyi ' a-tlunni mak ha rkari re , de mitlina ira luini-nuhranu yoma edonna mpiair ma'ta . Rhaun pa riwra , Mutlin mai ami Matromlawnu nee ! De nhiaunu re , rayatlin momuou lia Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu Makodi plolli .
You have lived in luxury on the earth , and taken your pleasure . You have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter . ||| Miy e mrie ' a-mtiarg olekwa ne , miy mi'ina-miemni oleka nohkeran di wullu-we'elli . Miy emeka nhiuri-wnia'ana maka riy rwa'ana pa rhi ' apetna inonni totpa lerni ntu'tu wa dewade rwunu-rwenna pa ra'ana .
You have condemned and you have murdered the righteous one . He does n't resist you . ||| Miy miana e miukum penna riy mak kakleha do ' a-hala , mak edonna kmalawan tiy miy .
Be patient therefore , brothers , until the coming of the Lord . Behold , the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth , being patient over it , until it receives the early and late rain . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy , la ' yoma mak kre ' a-ktaru mak knahora-knala ' a miy die hota kler la niukum lalawna , la ' hade pede mhiuria ralammi pa twei nieka Orgahi-Orha ' a maimiaini . Mimkek nek la mak kanhyi ' a-katlunni ida wnieini la nhyi'ini-tlunanni la'pa nmai wia rieiki-wnio'ora mak kla ' mormiorni . Nwei niek la ototna la'pa lelpawu pniaharni ne la'pa otna la ' a ora-au radeutu .
You also be patient . Establish your hearts , for the coming of the Lord is at hand . ||| La'pa miy miana miatu mhiuria ralammi me yan mimta'ata , mere mtiutrieri tertehra yoma la ' a ler maka ha rnel tiaru hota Orgahi-Orha ' a maimiaini mana e rrehgor wua .
Do n't grumble , brothers , against one another , so that you wo n't be judged . Behold , the judge stands at the door . ||| Yana mhi ' a gai huplu-gai pietna me yana idma nwaghal ida . Yanhi'pa Orgahi Nukum miy . Maktoran watghudi Nwahi ' pa Nmai wia .
Take , brothers , for an example of suffering and of perseverance , the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mhioratreria , makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak kakot nohora Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni-tunnu . Ir ratehra nek ralamni la ' kropna-krieutu ralamni .
Behold , we call them blessed who endured . You have heard of the perseverance of Job and have seen the Lord in the outcome , and how the Lord is full of compassion and mercy . ||| Mimkek nohora ira wniehwani-liakatni . Riy mak katu khur niohor ralam mehrani , de la ' it wniarorni-wnialaini de ir er mak klernan untu . Miy e mitlin olek Ayupa nhur niohora , ne miat niohor wal lia ' hohoni de Orgahi-Orha ' a Nara ' a-napalga owa'an e ' a . Pede mimkek oleka de Orgahi-Orha ' a nanpena ed mak ktulla-ksayni rimormior nohkerna wawannu .
But above all things , my brothers , do n't swear-not by heaven , or by the earth , or by any other oath , but let your yes be yes , and your no , no , so that you do n't fall into hypocrisy . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali miy ! Maka reriehenu pa mhioratreria de , la'pa mikot pa miwra hota aghi ' a emkadi-emkade , de yan memmemna mliokra pa miala nohkerna-rai miarna onde Ilyamou-Watyatoha onde hanek-harahu wuawannu pa ma mpiow nammi . Mere mikot neka miwra Yowa , pena aghi ' a , onde Hota a ' g edon ghi ' a . Ne hota hya ' maka mikota re hota plola pa mhi ' nana re totpena yana nod miy lia Uplerlawna niukamnu .
Is any among you suffering ? Let him pray . Is any cheerful ? Let him sing praises . ||| La'pa rlernana riy id tiy miy die , e hoho ' a-wakwaka , de mikot la pa nsumbaini . La'pa la miy miana dom e ramuki-rahepru , de mikot la re pa ramuki-rahepur nohora Uplerlawna , de rwahniar pa ra'uli-rawedia .
Is any among you sick ? Let him call for the elders of the assembly , and let them pray over him , anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord , ||| La'pa riy dom de e namehra , de mikot la pa npolga o'ta-mata krei totpena rsumbain la mak kamehra de , ne roha wu'ru la inonni de rwet la Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni .
and the prayer of faith will heal him who is sick , and the Lord will raise him up . If he has committed sins , he will be forgiven . ||| La'pa he ' mak ksumbain de npesiay memna , de hota Orgahi-Orha ' a ed mak kodia kalwieda la mak kamehra-kamau de . Ne la'pa riy de nhi ' do ' a-nyap hiala , de hota Uplerlawna ed maka Namou-nawitna do'oni-halli de . Ne hota mak kamehra-kamau die nler la kalwiedni .
Confess your sins to one another and pray for one another , that you may be healed . The insistent prayer of a righteous person is powerfully effective . ||| La ' hade pede mpiayow nohora do'omi-halmi ne idma nsumbain ida , totpena mlier la kalwiedni-paitiotni . Ne la'pa riy maka khi'inde klernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , de sniumbaini de nodia plola-mneh lawna .
Elijah was a man with a nature like ours , and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain , and it did n't rain on the earth for three years and six months . ||| Mimkek tek Elia . E ' de rimormiori emekwalia ita . Elia nsumbain toto ' meman pa yana otna ntur lia nohkerna wawannu . Noma otna edonna ntur niana anni wotel riehennu .
He prayed again , and the sky gave rain , and the earth produced its fruit . ||| La'awa honi noma nsumbaini owa'ana . Noma lyanti nhurgernia otna ne nohmarna mana nodia rieiki-wnio'or lawna la rimormiori .
Brothers , if any among you wanders from the truth and someone turns him back , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa riy id tiy miy die nhoitio'or doinia Uplerlawna wniatutnu-wniaye'eni mak kaplol de , mere riy ida nodia riy de pa napalia owa'an Uplerlawna ,
let him know that he who turns a sinner from the error of his way will save a soul from death and will cover a multitude of sins . ||| mhioratreria . Riy maka kawilu-kawewla riy mak kler olek la do ' a-hala ralamni pa napal lia Uplerlawna loini-talanni , de riy de ed maka kamori-kalewan nana riy della matmiati-molmuolu ne nreiniande do ' a-hal mutlialawna mana rawnie'er dodioin la . Kalwie'du tiy miy hononmi , Yakowsi
Peter , an apostle of Jesus Christ , to the chosen ones who are living as foreigners in the Dispersion in Pontus , Galatia , Cappadocia , Asia , and Bithynia , according to the foreknowledge of God the Father , in sanctification of the Spirit , that you may obey Jesus Christ and be sprinkled with his blood , Grace to you and peace be multiplied . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana la ' a rira liawanmi mak kahulti-kahamra mak kanie'er la Pontus , Galatia , Kapadokia , Asia me Bitinia . A ' di de Petrus . Yesus Kristus Nhopn a ' pua agodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Awuak de Uplerlawna ed mak ktowria ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy . Ina-nara , miy er maka Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de Nwalir niana pa mrie'ela E mutnu-rahanu Nlernohora E ralma-riorni la ululu memna . Ne la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiwni pede Nhi ' olek miy pia mpial lia E mut wuamueheni , totpena miy miana miatu mi'unni-mimta'ata Yesus Kristus lirni-tunnu . Yoma Ennairia E rarni pa na Nwuri-nohma do'omi-halmi .
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , who according to his great mercy caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead , to an incorruptible and undefiled inheritance that does n't fade away , reserved in Heaven for you , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mai pia ta'uli-tawedi tlilili-tmamuawua Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , de Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Amni mak Yesus wal pia Nkola tieru-nawur nehla de . Ita'uli-tawedia Uplerlawna yoma Ensayn toto ' memn ita pede Nal it pa tler la mormiori warwuaru . Itlernan mormior warwuaru de yoma Enamori owa'ana Yesus Kristus la matmiatni ralamni . Ne Uplerlawna hihi'ini de ed mak kodia it la nhia'argen miak karuri . Itsa'ar it ralamni la E ' a yoma hota Enal it pa tmormiori-tdardiari pia nodi liarni . Mormiori-dardiar die emolmolan nekama re ' a-tniaru maka Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targa oleka la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa hota Nala mai ita . Ne hade de hota emolmolan nekama re ' a-tniaru maka ta'en niana niata onde ngehpa onde nmadwuri .
who by the power of God are guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time . ||| Miy mpiesiay lia Uplerlawna . Ne la ' miy pesiaymi de pede Enala plolli-mneheni natiak reri miy pia la'pa ntutu-nte'ela ' lera noha niatni . Totpena la ' Yesus maimiaini mak kodia mormiori-lewlewan de , de miy miana mrie ' pa mlier la mormiori-lewlewna .
In this you greatly rejoice , though now for a little while , if need be , you have been grieved in various trials , ||| Mere hota la ' lera ho'ke'eni di de mlier la lui-nuhru la ' a yamuki-yama'ala , kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a . Mere la'pa emkade ho'mana hota mihepur toto ' meman la lui-nuhru re , yoma mhioratreria mormiori miaka Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targa pa hota mliernana .
that the proof of your faith , which is more precious than gold that perishes , even though it is tested by fire , may be found to result in praise , glory , and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ- ||| Hota mlier la yamuki-yama'ala nniahora-nniala ' a totpena mtiut muemna de miy e mpiesiay toto ' memna Orgahi-Orha ' a me edonna . Mpiaror tek la maha , maka hota la ' lera id de niat weyata . Mah de nek de rala ai ra rhudia . Mere miy pesiaymi hota narehi maha welli . Pa emkade walia hota rala kropna-krieutu ra rhudia miy pesiaymi de totpena rat niohora pesiaymi de plollolli me rurni-laini . Ne la ' pesiaymi mak karur die , pede hota mliernan ya'uli-yawedi , yatota-yawawa la ' ler maka Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'an pa rimormiori honona rlina-rmat ramkek memna E ' a .
whom , not having known , you love . In him , though now you do n't see him , yet believing , you rejoice greatly with joy that is unspeakable and full of glory , ||| Ina-nara , la ' ululu de miy edon mlina-miat Yesus Kristus de , mere emkade ho'mana mial ralammi pa nod rer lia E ' a . Ne la ' a dodo'ondi de miy edon mimkek nan walia mere mimpiesiay E ' a ne mimuki-mihepur nohor memna ,
receiving the result of your faith , the salvation of your souls . ||| yoma miy e mlier la mormiori-lewlewna . Mlier la mormiori-lewlewan de yoma miy mpiesiay E ' a .
Concerning this salvation , the prophets sought and searched diligently . They prophesied of the grace that would come to you , ||| Mormiori-lewlewan di maka Uplerlawna Nal tiy miy die , ed maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu rakot nohora la ' ululu . La ' ler ululu de rpaiki Uplerlawna nnio'oni-niatnu pa rwarora-rwalai niohora
searching for who or what kind of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them pointed to when he predicted the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow them . ||| totpa irat muemna hota emkameni la , me mowen nianpena ha rdunti-rwetria Kristus de pa nhor diewade ra'uli-rawed E ' a la gen tiutullu . Rwaror nohora hade yoma Kristus Nhiwni mak kdella ir ihranu ralamni Nakot olek la ir de hota Kristus de Nler la kropna-krieutu nanpena Nler la ya'uli-yawedi .
To them it was revealed that they served not themselves , but you , in these things , which now have been announced to you through those who preached the Good News to you by the Holy Spirit sent out from heaven , which things angels desire to look into . ||| La ' ululu meman de Uplerlawna Nakot targ olek walia la makwohorulu-ktatrulu re la ' a mormiori-lewlewan di , Niwra E nnio'oni maka nhi'inde makwohorulu-ktatrulu e rakot nohora , hota edon ntuin la ' makwohorulu-ktatrulu re lerni mere la ' miy lermi . Ne la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lera-mela ri , Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha Nala plolli-mneheni pa riy rma rakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota la ' a mormiori-lewlewan di tiy miy wia . Ne Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu la Ilyamou-Watyatoha ho'mana rlina-rmata totpa rna'erit nan nohora Uplerlawna hihi'ini-yapyapni la ' a mormiori-lewlewan di .
Therefore prepare your minds for action . Be sober , and set your hope fully on the grace that will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ- ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , yoma la ' hare honona maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana tiy miy die , pede mpiahi ' targa pa mliernohora Uplerlawna lirni , miodi inonmi re la plol wawna , la'pa mhia'ara pitga inonmi la ' a mormiori-dardiari yara ' a-yapalu mak hota Uplerlawna Nala tiy miy la ' Yesus Kristus maimiaini de .
as children of obedience , not conforming yourselves according to your former lusts as in your ignorance , ||| Mitlina-mitailla Uplerlawna miy Amlawanmi de , ne yana mliernohora nhiol yatyata mak ka'hira ralma-riormi la ' ululu , la ' lera miy edon miat mua'ta Uplerlawna .
but just as he who called you is holy , you yourselves also be holy in all of your behavior , ||| Rwaldioinia de la ' hya ' to'owa la mormiormi de yana mhi ' do ' a-myap hiala , emeknekama Uplerlawna nhiolli mak kakleha do ' a-hala . E Nmeh ' a ed maka kwalir nian miy pia Nhi ' miy lia E gah wamueheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala .
because it is written , You shall be holy , for I am holy . ||| Pede yana mhi ' do ' a-myap hiala yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e rhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni Niwra , Yana mhi ' do ' a-myap hiala yoma A'ukleha do ' a-hala .
If you call on him as Father , who without respect of persons judges according to each man 's work , pass the time of your living as foreigners here in reverent fear , ||| Miy msiumbain de nhi'inde mpiet la Uplerlawna de miy Ammi toh ! Ne miy Amlawanmi de ed maka hota Na ' reria watghudi la rimormiori de edonna Nwaliria matni enni , mere nlola rhi'ina leltiutu-relan mahmera nhudi-npara rimormiori nlernohora ir hihi'ini-yapyapni . La ' hade pede miatu mi'unni-mimta'ata Uplerlawna pa mhiol lia plol wawna la mormiormi tetema la ' nohkeran di , yoma miy mormiormi di , de emolmolan nekama riy mak klaun la riy nohoni la ler ho'ke'eni to ' a .
knowing that you were redeemed , not with corruptible things like silver or gold , from the useless way of life handed down from your fathers , ||| Mhi ' emkade yoma miy e miat niohora hota Uplerlawna Nala hya ' pa Ntuwu-nhai miy totpena ra ralgot miy lia ' a mormiori-dardiar miak edon kperkuna , maka upmi-tgarmi re rhakar nohora . Uplerlawna edon Nala leli-maha mak hota tani ha na'ana onde karte ' a ha nweyata pa na Ntuwu-nhai miy .
but with precious blood , as of a lamb without blemish or spot , the blood of Christ , ||| Mere Enala maka ktulliawna-kwelwierta , de Yesus Kristus rarni inhatta . E orgahani Nmeh ' a maka Nwal lia Duma mak kakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti , pa rhi ' a la hopopa-hegeuru hoihoi-tantiani la Uplerlawna .
who was foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world , but was revealed in this last age for your sake , ||| Yesus Kristus ed maka Uplerlawna Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a la ' ululu memna , la ' ler maka Uplerlawna edonna Nakoki-nayap mia'ta nohkeran di . Ne la'pa la ' ler di maka nhi'pa la'awa noha niat wa , Uplerlawna Nhopan doin E ' pa Nmai wia totpena mlier la mormiori-lewlewna ralamni .
who through him are believers in God , who raised him from the dead and gave him glory , so that your faith and hope might be in God . ||| Uplerlawna ed maka kamoria Yesus Kristus la matmiati ralamni , ne ema Nran nana la ' gen tutulu . Ne la ' Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni la miy rerieimi , pede mpiesiay lia Uplerlawna . Emkade pede mpiesiaya me mhia'ara aranmi la Uplerlawna de hota Namori-nalewan miy .
Seeing you have purified your souls in your obedience to the truth through the Spirit in sincere brotherly affection , love one another from the heart fervently , ||| Ina-nara , la ' a lera-mela ri de mimou-miwitna oleka inonmi onnila mitlina-mitail olek la Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni , pede dodo'ondi de miatg oleka pa mtiulla-msiayni makpesiay wialmi pa emeka riy id nora hyalli . Pede a'ukot tiy miy die , hota miala ralammi tetema pa miy idma mtiulla-msiayn ida .
having been born again , not of corruptible seed , but of incorruptible , through the word of God , which lives and remains forever . ||| Yoma miy mlier olek la mormiori-dardiari warwuaru die edon onnila rimormiori nohkeran di mak hota edon nalo'on wali ne rmati . Mere rwaldioin la de onnila Uplerlawna miy Amlawanmi makden pa nodi liarni de Nala E lirni-tunnu mak kodi plolli pa na Namori-nalewan miy . Yoma E lirni de nodia mormiori-dardiari , ne lir de ed mak kodi plolli pa nodi liarni .
For , All flesh is like grass , and all of man 's glory like the flower in the grass . The grass withers , and its flower falls , ||| Yoma emeknekama ha rhorat targa la Puka ralamni de e niwra , Rimormiori riwnu-halli honona de emeknekama wewna me tullu-petanni , preheni-mkaini nor wutga rurni-laini re , emeknekama wewan deutu . Yoma hota rimormiori honona re rmati-rmolu me tullu-petanni re nhorwua pa emeknekama wewna mak kapliau wua pa dewatnu mana napi'ir wa .
but the Lord 's word endures forever . This is the word of Good News which was preached to you . ||| Mere Orgahi-Orha ' a lirni-tunnu de nden nek la pa la nodi liarni . Ne lira tun die , de Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota maka ha rakot targa tiy miy .
Putting away therefore all wickedness , all deceit , hypocrisies , envies , and all evil speaking , ||| Mitlin oleka hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhi ' a tiy miy pede awuak pa mhioplial momuoga yatyatni-halalli mak kden la inonmi re , de yana mpiutra-mpialka , miklili-mikdiori , mi'ohpa-milahara , yana mtiot pa mpial lia riy samomuou . Yana miy ralam mehra la ' a hya ' maka rimormior wialmi gahani onde mipupu-miheri , milernu-miha ' a , mipolu-miliella rimormiori wialmi .
as newborn babies , long for the pure spiritual milk , that with it you may grow , ||| Mliekur pa mitlin la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka plollola pa emolmolan nekama papay miaka na'nama ha rayor niana nahakhak uh pua nuhu , totpa la ' a lira-tun die miy pesiaymi de hota yeher to ' pa naruri-nalai pia la'pa ntutu-nte ' meman la ler maka hota Yesus Kristus e Nmai owa'ana pa Namori-nalewan miy .
if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is gracious . ||| Ina-nara , mpialiewan pa mitlin la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu yoma miy orgahami miatg oleka de Orgahi-Orha ' a kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy .
Come to him , a living stone , rejected indeed by men , but chosen by God , precious . ||| Mpiakrian reri Yesus Kristus de mak kod riy la mormiori-dardiari . E de , de emolmolan nekama watu liar pianulu maka tukna-tukna re rasrala yoma ratniekame edon perkuna . Mere la ' a Uplerlawna yamkekni de E ' ed maka ktulliawna-kwelwierta , maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana .
You also as living stones are built up as a spiritual house , to be a holy priesthood , to offer up spiritual sacrifices , acceptable to God through Jesus Christ . ||| Me miy die mana mlier olek la mormiori warwuaru pede miy die emolmolan nekama watu-watu maka ha rnairia pa rariria roma-krei ida , yoma la ' miy ralammi re Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Ndella . Enhi ' miy totpa hota mpial lia riy maka Uplerlawna Nwaliri-nwalioha pa Nhi ' a la E gah wamueheni maka ktulla-kar lia E ' a emeka imam pa miala himima-rere ' a la E ' a , maka E ihranu ralamni nala . Himima-rere'emi re rla ' nana E ralamni onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni la miy rerieimi .
Because it is contained in Scripture , Behold , I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone , chosen and precious . He who believes in him will not be disappointed . ||| Yoma la ' a Puka ralamni de e rhorat targa Uplerlawna lirni maka Enakot nohora Yesus Kristus , de entot nohora E la watu liar pianulu ida . Uplerlawna lirni de Niwra , Mimkek ee ! Awualir nian oleka watu mak karuri-kalai id pa ghi ' a la watu liar pianulu la ' A ge'nu la ' a Sion . Ne he ' maka kpesiay E ' de , yan mimta'ata mhia'ara aranmi la , yoma hota Enhi ' nan maka Enakot targ oleka re .
For you who believe therefore is the honor , but for those who are disobedient , The stone which the builders rejected has become the chief cornerstone , ||| E ' de mak ktulliawna-kwelwierta la ' a he ' mak kpesiay lia E ' a . Mere mak edonna kpesiay Yesus hota rhoratreria Puka lirni mak emkadilla , Wat muaka tukna edonna rnair nana pa rhi ' a roma-lewu , mere rasrala , de Uplerlawna Nnairia olek pa Nhi ' a la watu liar pianulu .
and , a stumbling stone and a rock of offense . For they stumble at the word , being disobedient , to which also they were appointed . ||| Ne ntuin tar walia mak edon kpesiay Yesus , de Puka lirni mak emkadilla , Watu die watu nniuli-nniewta narieiniande irwetur tar lia pa rlerwah ' a gaini . Irwetur tar lia yoma ir edonna ratlina-ratailla Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Hade ed maka Uplerlawna Nrora-nlai tiarg olek hadewa .
But you are a chosen race , a royal priesthood , a holy nation , a people for God 's own possession , that you may proclaim the excellence of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light . ||| Mere miy di de Uplerlawna Nwalir nian olek miy wia me mpiali olek emeka imam mak khima-kre ' a ray kniarni . Miy mrie ' wut olek la makden la luwu-a'na hairi-hairi mak kakleha do ' a-hala . Mlier olek la Uplerlawna mutnu totpa miy er mak kakot nohora E hihi'ini-yapyapni totpena riy ra'uli-rawedi E ' a . Yoma E ' ed maka kpolgot miy lia melmelli-kalkalamni pa mlier la lelerni mak kodia kalwiedni-paitiotni .
In the past , you were not a people , but now are God 's people , who had not obtained mercy , but now have obtained mercy . ||| La ' ler ululu ma'ta , de miy edonna mlier ma'ta la Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu . Mere la dodo'ondi de rwet olek miy lia Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu . Ululu de miy edon mliernan ma'ta Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni , mere la ' dodo'ondi de mliernan olek hade wa .
Beloved , I beg you as foreigners and pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden rer lia a ralmu , miy di de do'ona-dakan miy , me makahulti-kahamra miy lia nohkeran di wawannu . La ' hade pede awuak de yan memmemna mliernohora nhiol yatyata mak ka'hira ralma-riormi . Yoma la'pa mliernohora hare ta'en niana mliernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni , yoma emeknekama la ' miy ralammi re miy e miwunu-mi'ara .
having good behavior among the nations , so in that of which they speak against you as evildoers , they may see your good works and glorify God in the day of visitation . ||| Mere mpialiewan totpa nhiolmi-lietmi re rden la plol wawna . Ne hota la'pa riy mak kaplin niohor ma'ta Orgahi-Orha ' a re rwaghal miy ho'mana , hota ramkek nana nhiolmi-lietmi mak kalwiedweda re pede hota la ' ler maka Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Nmai owa'an de , ira'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna yoma la ' a miy nhiolmi-lietmi re .
Therefore subject yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord 's sake , whether to the king , as supreme , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , awuak totpa miy mhiu'ru-mhielam la ina-ama , o'ta-mata rimormiori nohkerna wawannu totpena nhiolmi-lietmi de nodi ya'uli-yawed lia Orgahi-Orha ' a . Mhiu'ru-mhielam la ray mak ktorna-krautu la ' a ina-ama , o'ta-mata rimormiori nohkerna honona ,
or to governors , as sent by him for vengeance on evildoers and for praise to those who do well . ||| ne la ' walia mak ktorna-krautu la hairi-hairi noha-rai yapatni gubernur , maka ray de ha ntutga pa rukmua mak kadunti-kawetria deulu-tatra nohkerna , me totpa ra'uli riy mak khi ' a kalwiedni-paitiotni .
For this is the will of God , that by well-doing you should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna Nwahaka totpena nhiolmi-lietmi kalwiedweda re ed maka kato'ma targa riy mak podku lirni-tunnu mak ha nakota lol nurnu . Ta'en niana irakot nohora yatyatmi-halalmi yoma mikleha do ' a-hala .
Live as free people , yet not using your freedom for a cloak of wickedness , but as bondservants of God . ||| Mmiori-mdiari mpiehwa-mliakta pa emolmolan nekama riy maka Uplerlawna Nwe'er doin oleka la wutwutu-kokgohu ralamni . Mere yana mpiarora de rwe'er olek miy pede hota mhi ' a-myapia owa'an la do ' a-hala . Mere mpiehwa-mliakat de mtiutga inonmi de emeka Uplerlawna limni-tutnu miy .
Honor all men . Love the brotherhood . Fear God . Honor the king . ||| Miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma rimormior wialmi me miatu mira ' a-mipalga makpesiay wialmi . Mi'unni-mimta'at la Uplerlawna , me mitota-miwawa ray mak ktorna-krautu .
Servants , be in subjection to your masters with all respect , not only to the good and gentle , but also to the wicked . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy hononmi mak la ' ata-wa'ara , hota mial ralammi tetema pa mhiu'ru-mhielam la upmi-matrommi . Yana mhi ' nan to ' a la matrommi mak khi ' kalwiedwed miy onde mak kaltieri mnapnapal la tiy miy . Mere mhiu'ru-mhielam walia upmi-matrommi maka kahankerna-karalmha'ara .
For it is commendable if someone endures pain , suffering unjustly , because of conscience toward God . ||| Yoma la'pa miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi re raplol ho'mana mere upmi-matrommi re rnahora-rnala ' a miy , miatu mhiur niohora ralam mehrani-mitehra ihrami ralamni pa mtiutga wniehwa-liakta samomuou totpa mhi ' amikria Uplerlawna ralamni . La'pa emkade de hota hya ' maka ha mhi ' a re de raplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
For what glory is it if , when you sin , you patiently endure beating ? But if when you do well , you patiently endure suffering , this is commendable with God . ||| Mere la'pa miy edon mliernohor upmi-matrommi lirni pa narieiniande enliwra-nkaklu miy mere miy edon mpiahla , de Uplerlawna edon Na'uli-nawedi miy lia hihi'imi-yapyapmi de . Mere la'pa mdiella plol wawna mere emkade ho'mana ramuki-rama'al miy , nhiolmi-lietmi mak katu khu'ru-khelam nohora ma'ta de ed mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
For you were called to this , because Christ also suffered for us , leaving you an example , that you should follow his steps , ||| Uplerlawna Npol miy totpa mhiur niohora ralam mehrami la ' a kropna-krieutu maka miy mliernana onnila miy hihi'imi mak kalwiedweda re . Yoma Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a nek de Nlernana kropna-krieutu yoma la ' a miy rerieimi . Ne la ' hade wal pia Yesus Enala talan tiy miy totpena mtikil rer lia E yeheni
who did n't sin , neither was deceit found in his mouth . ||| maka ha rakot nohora la Puka ralamni riwra , E edonna Nhi ' targ eti do ' a-hala , me la ' riy id mana edonna natlin etia E naltieri lalahara .
When he was cursed , he did n't curse back . When he suffered , he did n't threaten , but committed himself to him who judges righteously . ||| La'pa riy rwahoiti-rwarenna , mana edonna Nwahla . Ler maka ha rliwra-rkaklia , mana edonna Nakota hota Nukmua ira . Mere Notil to ' a lirni-tunnu me nniahora-nniala ' a rella Uplerlawna , mak ktorna rhinleltiutu-relan mahmera mak khudi-kpara la plol wawna .
He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree , that we , having died to sins , might live to righteousness . You were healed by his wounds . ||| Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a nekpa Ntutulu-nlelewua it do'oni-halli la ' a auwlakra hananni , totpena itawnie'er la do ' a-hala ralamni , ne tmori-tdar die itsi ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni . Yesus Kristus no'oni-rarni ed mak kala ulti mnapla-tema mnapal tiy miy .
For you were going astray like sheep , but now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls . ||| Yoma ululu de miy emeka dum mak khal talla . Mere la dodo'ondi de miy e miwali olek la lowna-krahana ralamni yoma mliernohor oleka Yesus makheri-maklai gembala me mak ktera-kdem miy aranmi .
In the same way , wives , be in subjection to your own husbands , so that , even if any do n't obey the Word , they may be won by the behavior of their wives without a word , ||| Hawa patke ' a miatu mhiu'ru-mhielma mitlina-mitailla muanke'emi re pa emekwalima ata-wa'ara rhu'ru-rhelma ratlina-ratailla upni-matromni , totpena la'pa hapmi muanke ' a re edon rpesiaya Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni , miy edon mpiatutu niohora kot mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna la ' ir ho'mana , rmeh ' a rwaldioinia pa rpesiaya yoma ramkek nan oleka nhiolmi-lietmi
seeing your pure behavior in fear . ||| mak kaploi-kaple'era me nhiu'ru-nhielammi .
Let your beauty come not from the outward adorning of braiding your hair , and of wearing gold ornaments or of putting on fine clothing , ||| Yana mtiutga iran hloimi-matlawrurmi miy gai samomuoumi yoma mniairia nhiolmi-knia'atmi , leli-maha onde lawra-rainia wel wierwerta .
but from the hidden person of the heart , in the incorruptible adornment of a gentle and quiet spirit , which is very precious in God 's sight . ||| Rwaldioinia de mtiut nieka miy samomuoumi de lola nhiolmi-lietmi mak kaploi-kaple'era . Mtiut nieka yehwa mnapla me yehwa maka edonna kawunu-kawenna . Nhioli-lieta re hota ed mak kodia wel wierta la Uplerlawna yamkekni me nden nek la pa nodi liarni .
For this is how in the past the holy women who hoped in God also adorned themselves , being in subjection to their own husbands . ||| Nhioli-lieta samomuou mak emkade ed maka patke ' ululu mak kla ' olek la Uplerlawna gahani me maka kha'ar reria aranni la E ' a nhi'inde rhi ' a . Ir er maka rhu'ru-rhelam la hawni muanke ' a .
So Sarah obeyed Abraham , calling him lord , whose children you now are if you do well and are not put in fear by any terror . ||| Sara mana emkade wal pia natu nhu'ru-nhelam la hawni Abraham . Nhu'ru-nhelam pa npolga Abraham de niwra , Matroma . Ne miy miana emekto'ama Sara la'pa mliernohor e nhiolli mak khi ' samomuou die , de yan mpadura .
You husbands , in the same way , live with your wives according to knowledge , giving honor to the woman as to the weaker vessel , as also being joint heirs of the grace of life , that your prayers may not be hindered . ||| Me la'pa hawa muanke ' a miy . Miy miana mhi ' samomuou lia hapmi de . Yoma miat niohora hapmi patke ' a rakleha ruri-lai manmuanu pa emekwali miy . Miatu mhiu'ru-mhielam nohora yoma hota miy rewre'wa pa mliernana mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Miy mliernana mormiori-dardiar die onnila Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pede Nara ' a-napalga hade tiy miy . Mhi ' samomuou lia hapmi de totpena yanpa nhioli-lieta mak edon kaplola nodia yawuhi-yawe'et la miy sniumbainmi .
Finally , all of you be like-minded , compassionate , loving as brothers , tenderhearted , courteous , ||| La ' dodo'ondi awuak de miy hononmi mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida , mtiutga ralam kalwiedmi la riy mak kler la lui-nuhru , mhi ' hadom de idma nhi ' kalwiedwed la ida emekwalima patke ' a ida nor elli , muanke ' a id nora hyalli . Me idma nsayn reri ida . Yana idma nparwah ' a ida , mere idma natlina-natailla ida .
not rendering evil for evil or insult for insult , but instead blessing , knowing that you were called to this , that you may inherit a blessing . ||| Yan memmemna idma nwahla yatyatni-halalli la ida . Onde idma nwahla ida wniahoiti-wniarenanni yapollu-yalielli . Mere miatu mpiahla riy yatni-halli de mpiak la Uplerlawna pa Nala kalwiedni-paitiotni la ira . Yoma Uplerlawna Npol miy pia mhi ' emkade , totpena hota miy miana mliernan walia kalwiedni-paitiotni la Uplerlawna .
For , He who would love life and see good days , let him keep his tongue from evil and his lips from speaking deceit . ||| Yoma Puka lirni de niwra , Riy maka kiwra uhwanu nwalapi me ga'arni nwahipni totpena ndunit nana-nwetur nan pripanni-fa'anni , de natiak nurnu-tiernu totpena yana nhi ' a nur ghala-tier ghala onde ohpa-lahara , klili-kdiori .
Let him turn away from evil and do good . Let him seek peace and pursue it . ||| Nhopliala yatyatni-halalli , ne nwehwa-nlakat la kalwiedni-paitiotni . Nwahakhak toto ' memna totpena yan nora riy dom to ' pa rawunu-rawenna .
For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous , and his ears open to their prayer , but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil . ||| Yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a Nlin reri-nmat reria riy mak khi ' mak kaplol la E yamkekni . Ne Orgahi-Orha ' a Nta'wa taru tlinni la ira sniumbainni . Mere Orgahi-Orha ' a Nora mak khi ' a yatyatni-halalli rwahapra lia'ara-rwadawar wehla .
Now who will harm you if you become imitators of that which is good ? ||| Ina-nara , la'pa miy mpialiewan pa mhi ' a-myapia kalwiedweda , de hota riy edon rhi ' yatyat tiy miy toh !
But even if you should suffer for righteousness ' sake , you are blessed . Do n't fear what they fear , neither be troubled . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana , la'pa hota mlier nek la kropna-krieutu , polpuolu-wakwaka yoma miy mhi ' a-myapia kalwieda-paitiota , de hota mliernana unut lawna ! Ina-nara , yan mimta'ata rira , me yana ihrami rteplu .
But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts . Always be ready to give an answer to everyone who asks you a reason concerning the hope that is in you , with humility and fear , ||| Mere mhioratreria Yesus Kristus de Orgahi-Orha ' a E inhatti pa mi'unni-mimta'at E ' a . Ne mpiahi ' targa totpena la'pa he ' to ' a pa natian nohor miy lia ' Kot Kalwiedni-Paitiotni maka miy mhia'ar aranmi la , de mpiahla lirni . Mere mniair nieka lira mnapla , me mhiu'ru-mhielam nohor lirmi pa mikot nohora .
having a good conscience . Thus , while you are spoken against as evildoers , they may be disappointed who curse your good way of life in Christ . ||| Mhi ' a hya ' maka miat niohora de ha naplola totpena hota riy mak kapupu-kaheri miy nhiol kalwiedmi yoma mpiesiay oleka Yesus Kristus de , hota orgahi rmola-rma ' a la ' ir lir wamueheni re .
For it is better , if it is God 's will , that you suffer for doing what is right than for doing evil . ||| La'pa Uplerlawna Nakot targa pa it tler la kropna-krieutu de onnila ita nhiol kalwiedwedni de ha samomuou hade . Hornama yana itler la kropna-krieutu onnila it tsi ' a yatyatni-halalli .
Because Christ also suffered for sins once , the righteous for the unrighteous , that he might bring you to God , being put to death in the flesh , but made alive in the Spirit , ||| Yoma Yesus Kristus Nhi ' emkade wali . Enmeh ' a nekane ed mak kmat die eneknek raralamni , yoma la ' a rimormiori do'oni-halli . E ' ed mak kakleha do ' a-hala mere Ntutulu-nlelewua matmiati la ' a riy riwnu-halli mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala re . Yesus Kristus de Nhi ' hade totpena E ' ed mak kodia miy lia Uplerlawna . Rwunu-rwenna E inonni mere la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli pede Uplerlawna Namori owa'an E ' la matmiati ralamni .
in whom he also went and preached to the spirits in prison , ||| La ' a Uplerlawna Nhiwni plolli-mneheni pede la ' pa E Nakot nohora kot mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna la ' a do ' a-hmuakarnu mak kwatiawua riy mak kmati olekwa pa ema rho'la tar wua pa rwewiei nieka Uplerlawna niukamnu .
who before were disobedient when God waited patiently in the days of Noah while the ship was being built . In it , few , that is , eight souls , were saved through water . ||| Do ' a-hmuakarnu ri ha rwatiawua riy mak edon ka'unni-kamta'ata Uplerlawna la ' ululu memna la ' lera Nuh tuwnu . La ' ler de maka Nuh nakoki-nayapia aupual liawna batra , de Uplerlawna Nwewiei niohora rira totpena rhoitio'ora-rtahnei do'oni-halli re . Mere eneknekato ' a riy wo'awa mak kler la yamori-yalewna . Rler la aupual liawan de ralamni ne aupual liawan de nanera la tah ' i ulti pa nalewna ir la ' a gera ktiowru-opli nhia ' lawan de .
This is a symbol of baptism , which now saves you-not the putting away of the filth of the flesh , but the answer of a good conscience toward God-through the resurrection of Jesus Christ , ||| La ' a tui die wniahaurnu emeknekama yawalliohora la ' a nhiarani maka la ' dodo'ondi de rnairia pa ra ralewan wali miy . Yawalliohora gera ktiowur de pa emeknekama ger maka ha rnairia pa ra rharan miy . Ger de edonna rnairia pa ramou-rawitna inonmi mak kakdeha , mere ger de ha ntut mueman nnia'eratni de mpiaka Uplerlawna pa Namou-nawitna miy ihrami-ralammi . Nhiarani mak emkade ed mak kamori-kalewan miy . Yamori-yalewan de mimliernana onnila Yesus Kristus Nmori owa'an la matmiatni ralamni ,
who is at the right hand of God , having gone into heaven , angels and authorities and powers being made subject to him . ||| ne Nha'at olek la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Pa la'pa dodo'ondi de Enamtatan la Uplerlawna walli malganna , de gen miaka ra'uli-rawed E ' la . Me Yesus Kristus inhatti ed mak kodi plolli la Uplerlawna hopopanni-li'irnu malaikat honona , me Enodi plolli wali la ' mak kodi plolli ror wutga mak karuri-kalai honona makden la nohkerna wawannu-lyanti nayanni la'pa noha darni wo'itu nora noha utnu-liannu .
Therefore , since Christ suffered for us in the flesh , arm yourselves also with the same mind , for he who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , Yesus Kristus inonni namehra-namau niohor oleka kropna-krieutu liwliwra-kakaklu . La ' hade pede mpiahi ' targa inonmi pa mimliernan walia emkade wali . La ' talan emkade pede mitiak rer lia miy pesiaymi . Yoma riy maka klernana kropna-krieutu la ' a ulatni-temni , de hota nolli nhiolli la ' a do ' a-hala .
that you no longer should live the rest of your time in the flesh for the lusts of men , but for the will of God . ||| La ' hade pede mormiormi-dardiarmi la noh di wawannu de , nlernohor oleka Uplerlawna talanni me edon nlernohor owa'ana nhioli yatyata mak ka'hira la rimormiori ralma-riorni .
For we have spent enough of our past time doing the desire of the Gentiles , and having walked in lewdness , lusts , drunken binges , orgies , carousings , and abominable idolatries . ||| Awuak totpena hadewa la nhiolmi-lietmi ululu die , yoma la ' a ulul ma'ta de mahnek memn oleka la miy mhi ' a-myapia hya ' maka miy ralammi nala , pa emekwalima riy maka kaplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna . Mhi ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna nhi'nande mpiehera-mia'wu la'pa miplinu miodia inonmi pa mhi ' a saworni-sawarna yatni-halli me mpiehwa-mliakta pora-dawra . Miy e mliernohora neka ralam ya'hira pa milira-miliai . Miy miana mhioi-mtiania uplera-upmati pa mpiera-mdiaiti olek la Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni .
They think it is strange that you do n't run with them into the same excess of riot , speaking evil of you . ||| Mere la'pa la dodo'ondi de riy maka edonna katga Orgahi-Orha ' a rwer rer wiawni la miy me rapolu-raliella , rahe ' i-ramali miy , yoma miy edonna mliernohor owa'an ir pa mhi ' nan do ' a-hal rariahu pa idma nutin-ndahla ida .
They will give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead . ||| Mere hota ir er maka rwalola plele'era do'oni-halli re la Uplerlawna , maka kwahi ' targa olek pa hota Nhudia mak kmati me mak kmormiori la watghudi lokarni .
For to this end the Good News was preached even to the dead , that they might be judged indeed as men in the flesh , but live as to God in the spirit . ||| La ' hade pede Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mana Yesus Nakot nohora la do ' a-hmuakarnu mak kwatiawua riy mak kmati oleka re totpena la emkameni ho'mana Uplerlawna Nukmua ir pa inonni rmati lia do'oni-halli rerieini , de hota nhiwni rmormior lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
But the end of all things is near . Therefore be of sound mind , self-controlled , and sober in prayer . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , nohkerna-rai miaran di de hota nwakrian pia nler la hohoni noha niata . La hade pede mpiaror samomuou me miatu miodi inonmi totpena mrian ralammi la Itmatromlawanni pa msiumbain rer lia .
And above all things be earnest in your love among yourselves , for love covers a multitude of sins . ||| Ononni de , it idma nsayn toto ' memn ida . Yoma la'pa it idma nsayn ida de , hota riy idma natu nhud niohora-npat niohor walia ida do'oni-halli yatyatni-halalli re .
Be hospitable to one another without grumbling . ||| Awuak pa idma natu nreinian id pa nanin la roma nayanni de yana nodia heri huplu-gai pietna .
As each has received a gift , employ it in serving one another , as good managers of the grace of God in its various forms . ||| Ina-nara , Uplerlawna Nal oleka ra ' a-palu karunia la miy hononmi totpa hota mkiar lia E kniarni . Rima-rima ra'ani-pallu re edon ramneha . La hade pede miy hononmi miatu mniairia ra ' a-palu maka ha mliernan de pa ma mtiulan la rimormiori wialmi . La talan emkade pede riy rnairia ra ' a-palu mak edonna kamneh ' a re pa rhi ' a kniarni maka ha rhakar targ oleka re ,
If anyone speaks , let it be as it were the very words of God . If anyone serves , let it be as of the strength which God supplies , that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ , to whom belong the glory and the dominion forever and ever . Amen . ||| de riy maka klernana ra ' a-palu pa nodia lira-tunu la ' rimormior wialli de , hya ' ed maka ha nakota-nalde'eta re , de ntolliohor mamaini Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Me la ' walia riy maka klernana ra ' a-palu pia khima-kre ' a rimormior wialli , de nnairia ra ' a-palu maka kwatiawua Uplerlawna orgahani totpa ntulan la rimormior wialli . La ' talan emkade pede Uplerlawna Nlernana ya'uli-yawed lia rimormiori maka kamkek nana miy hihi'imi-yapyapmi honona re . Uplerlawna hota Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi die onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni . E ' nanpena ed mak ktorna-krautu , ne E ' inhatta ed maka ha ra'uli-rawedia pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
Beloved , do n't be astonished at the fiery trial which has come upon you to test you , as though a strange thing happened to you . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kdella a ralmu , la ' dodo'ondi de mlier olek la kropna-krieutu totpena hota mtiut memna de miy e mpiesay toto ' memna me edonna . Pede yana mpier rer wiapmi la ' a kropna-krieutu re . Yana mpiarora de makpesiaya demade edonna nler la kropna-krieutu , yamuki-yama'ala .
But because you are partakers of Christ 's sufferings , rejoice , that at the revelation of his glory you also may rejoice with exceeding joy . ||| Mere mihepuepur nohora yoma miy miana emekwalima Yesus Kristus pa mlier la kropna-krieutu , nniahora-nniala ' a , totpena la'pa Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'an pa rurni-laini hititni-repreparni nayamkek wa , de hota miy miana er maka kahe ' i-kahepur meman nohora .
If you are insulted for the name of Christ , you are blessed , because the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you . On their part he is blasphemed , but on your part he is glorified . ||| La'pa riy rahe ' i-ramal miy die yoma miy e mliernohora Yesus Kristus , miy e mi'unut la ' hade , yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni mak kodia plolli-mneheni etla miy ralammi .
But let none of you suffer as a murderer , or a thief , or an evil doer , or a meddler in other men 's matters . ||| Mere yan memmemna mliernana kropna-krieutu yoma mpiunu-mpienna , onde mkiamnelu-mkiamna ' a onde hya'-hya ' to'owa maka kpera-kdait la mak ktorna-krautu deullu-tatarni . La'pa mrie ' teman nek la rira halli , ho'mana yana .
But if one of you suffers for being a Christian , let him not be ashamed , but let him glorify God in this matter . ||| Mere la'pa mliernana riwtu-hora mak kakropna-kakrieutu yoma la ' a miy pesiaymi ed mak kariei , de yan memmemna mmiola-mmia ' a . Mere mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna , yoma miy e miwo'or kota-miwo'or nan la Yesus Kristus .
For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household of God . If it begins first with us , what will happen to those who do n't obey the Good News of God ? ||| Yoma nte'ela lerni pa Uplerlawna Nhudia nohkerna la watghudi lokarni , ne Uplerlawna Nhudi-npara mutnu-rahanu re ulu . Uplerlawna nekane Nhudi-npara E a'nani ita , emkameni ho'ola riy mak edonna kpesiaya Uplerlawna Kot Kalwiedni dena ? !
If it is hard for the righteous to be saved , what will happen to the ungodly and the sinner ? ||| La ' a Puka ralamni e rhorat targa la , Riy kalwiedweda ho'mana rlola pleini riwtu-hora kropna-krieutu nampena rler la mormiori-lewlewna . Yaho'ma la ' a riy mak khi ' do ' a-hala , me kaplin niohor ma'ta Orgahi-Orha ' a ? !
Therefore let them also who suffer according to the will of God in doing good entrust their souls to him , as to a faithful Creator . ||| Hade pede la'pa mlier la lului-nurnuhru yoma la ' a Uplerlawna Nror targ olek hadella miy , mhia'ar tar tio'ola mormiormi la Uplerlawna mak kakoki-kayap niana miy , yoma Enakot targ oleka pa hota edon Nolin doin limni tiy miy , ne hota Enhi ' nan hya ' maka Enakot targa de . Ne la ' lelera-melmel neka pa mhi ' rer nieka hihi ' a-yapyapi kalwiedweda .
Therefore I exhort the elders among you , as a fellow elder and a witness of the sufferings of Christ , and who will also share in the glory that will be revealed , ||| Awuak pa ina-ama krei miy penatua , de mtia'wa tlinmi la a li'ru-tu'nu maka ha mpiaiki ri . Aghorta hadi pa agala tiy miy , de a ' g emekneka miy pia tla ' rewre'wa la ina-ama krei . Ne a ' g ed mak kamkek nana Yesus Kristus Nler la nniahora-nniala ' a . Ne la ' walia hota la ' ler maka Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'ana , de nodia preheni-mkaini hititni-repreparni pa rimormiori nohkeran di ha rlina-rmat meman de , de hota a ' g ed mak kre'ela liernana Uplerlawna plolli-mneheni me ya'ulli-yawedni .
shepherd the flock of God which is among you , exercising the oversight , not under compulsion , but voluntarily , not for dishonest gain , but willingly , ||| Hyal miy re , awuak de miodi plolli la krei mutnu maka Uplerlawna Nala tiy miy pia emolmolan nekama mak khuri-kwa'ana duma mutlialawna-taurlawna , nhuri-nwa'ana dumni re la kalwiedwedni . Mhima-mrie ' a krei mutnu re yoma ralammi nala kniar die , yoma kniar mak emkade ed mak kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni . Yana miapuhuna-miaprai niohor kniarmi de . Me yana mkiar pia emeka ina-ama krei mak kwahak to ' kupna-kai , mere mhi ' a de miodia ihrami ralamni tetema la kniar die pa mimkek la krei mutnu-rahanu .
not as lording it over those entrusted to you , but making yourselves examples to the flock . ||| Yana mitulu-mipetna inonmi pa mhiopan la ' a-mhiopan mai krei mutnu re , mere mtiutu loi-talla mak kodia la kalwieda-paitiota totpena rlernohora .
When the chief Shepherd is revealed , you will receive the crown of glory that does n't fade away . ||| Ne mhi ' emkare totpa la'pa nte'ela ler maka makhuri-kwa'ana Amlawanni Nmai wia , de hota mimliernan walia wutu-lai makhita-makrepra me lomarni edonna nmalmu .
Likewise , you younger ones , be subject to the elder . Yes , all of you clothe yourselves with humility and subject yourselves to one another , for God resists the proud , but gives grace to the humble . ||| Emkade walia ina-nara ama-hyali mak hatrapriapi miy , mhiu'ru-mhielam mitlina-mitailla yanulnullu-manatnatnu . La'pa miy hononmi de , yan mitulu-mipetna , mere idma natu nhu'ru-nhelam la ida lol yawa . Yoma la Puka ralamni de niwra , Uplerlawna Nwayotlia riy mak katulu-kapetna , mere Nwaldioinia pa Nara ' a-napalga riy mak katu khu'ru-khelma .
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God , that he may exalt you in due time , ||| Hade pede mhiu'ru-mhielam nohora inonmi lol yawa la ' a Uplerlawna mak kodi plolli pa Namori-nalewan miy , totpena la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lera Ha Nwalir tiarga de , E ' ed mak kran miy nanmi la ' heyanna .
casting all your worries on him , because he cares for you . ||| Yana ralammi namta'at la hadomdoma , mere la ' hya ' to ' pa mrian ralammi la ' Uplerlawna pa msiumbain nohora re , yoma E ' ed maka ksayni miy .
Be sober and self-controlled . Be watchful . Your adversary , the devil , walks around like a roaring lion , seeking whom he may devour . ||| Yan minin matmi , mere mimatmata , yoma hegana amlawanni nhi ' miy lia e arwalli . E ' de emolmolan nekama ohpora-ahdiawar maka homoma-lala ' a pa napolu-nawaka hya ' maka niwra nlihir matmata-nhaw riarara .
Withstand him steadfast in your faith , knowing that your brothers who are in the world are undergoing the same sufferings . ||| Mtiayawa lakmi la gaini ralamni , me mhi ' arur matmata pa mdien atehra la pesiaymi wawannu . Yoma miy e miat niohor walia miy mutwualmi makpesiay la ' a meni-meni to ' a nek de e rlernan wali kropanni-krieutnu pa emekwali miy .
But may the God of all grace , who called you to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus , after you have suffered a little while , perfect , establish , strengthen , and settle you . ||| Mlier olek la kropna-krieutu ho'mana hota edon nalo'on wali ne Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak ktutga E ralam kalwiedni la rimormiori la ' a hya ' a-hya ' a to'owa , de Enmeh ' a neka ed maka khi ' miy pia mlier owa'an la kalwiedni . Hota Naruri-na'orat nan miy totpena mtiutrieri kdededa . E ' ed mak kpolg olek miy pia mrie'ela mliernana E plolli-mneheni , hititni-repreparni mak kodi liarni onnila Yesus Kristus hihi'ini .
To him be the glory and the power forever and ever . Amen . ||| E ' ed maka ktorna-krautia hare honona la'pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
Through Silvanus , our faithful brother , as I consider him , I have written to you briefly , exhorting and testifying that this is the true grace of God in which you stand . ||| A horat ku ' u di nekpa u'enyatga tiy miy , de Silwanus a hya'lu maka apuesiaya ed mak ktulan la a ' pua tiulsi hadi . La ' a horat di de agiwra ghi ' totpena miy pesiaymi de la ' ga ' a . Ne la ' a horat di wal pia a'ukot nohora Uplerlawna talla plollolli-mneneheni benar mak ktutga E ralam kalwiedni mai ita . Mtiorrer pitpitga pesiaymi onnila E kalwiedni de .
She who is in Babylon , chosen together with you , greets you . So does Mark , my son . ||| Ina-nara , krei Babel mutnu maka kre ' wut miy lia riy maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana re , de rwak kalwieda tiy miy . Emkade walia Markus mana nwak kalwieda tiy miy . E ' de emeknekama a a'nu mak kden rer lia a ralmu .
Greet one another with a kiss of love . Peace be to all of you who are in Christ Jesus . Amen . ||| Ina-nara , awuak pa idma nwak kalwied la ida de , mial toto ' memna ralma kalwieda . Awuaka Orgahi-Orha ' a pa Nala kalwiedni-paitiotni la ' a miy hononmi , mak kla ' oleka Yesus Kristus limni ralamni . Nhiu'ru-nhielam mamni , Petrusa
Simon Peter , a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ , to those who have obtained a like precious faith with us in the righteousness of our God and Savior , Jesus Christ , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , miy miak kler la pesiay mak ktulliawna-kwelwierta pa emekwalima amlernan walia la ' ler ululu . Yesus Kristus de , de Uplerlawna makhi ' Ray lia mormiori-lewlewna inhatta . Ne E ' ed mak kariei piede itpesiay E ' a , yoma E ed mak kden nek la plol wawna . A ' di de Simon Petrus , Yesus Kristus hopopanni-lili'irnu mak Enhopan pa agodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord , ||| Awuak de Uplerlawna ed mak ktowria ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy . Hota mliernan hare yoma miat niohora oleka Uplerlawna me Yesus Itmatromlawanni de .
seeing that his divine power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness , through the knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and virtue , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , itat niohor oleka Orgahi-Orha ' a . La ' hade pede Enal E plol wamueheni pa na Naruri-na'orat nan ita , totpa tatu tmori-tdari , tsi ' a-tyapi , twehwa-tlakat la plol wawna pa nla ' nana E ralamni la hya ' a-hya ' to'owa . Orgahi-Orha ' a nhiolli-lietni kalwiedweda nareh dioin momuou hare honona . Ne la ' E nhiolli mak emkade pede Npolg olek it pa totpena itla ' E gah wamueheni .
by which he has granted to us his precious and exceedingly great promises , that through these you may become partakers of the divine nature , having escaped from the corruption that is in the world by lust . ||| La ' a E nhiolli mak kalwiedwed meman de pede Enano'targ oleka mai ita yamori-yalewna nora ra'ani-pallu mak ktulliawna-kwelwierta . La ' yamori-yalewna nora ra'ani-pallu maka Ha Nano'taru die pede miy mliernan talla pa miolin doinia nhioli-lieta , ilu-wniehwa mak kden rer lia wniarora-wnialai nohkerna yatyatni mak kod riy lia yatyatni-halalli , me hota mliernan nhiolia mak kaplola , de Uplerlawna nhiolli-lietni mak kaplola inhatti .
Yes , and for this very cause adding on your part all diligence , in your faith supply moral excellence , and in moral excellence , knowledge , ||| La hade pede mpialeran toto ' meman totpa pesiaymi de ra rnawalia mormiormi-dardiarmi mak kalwiedweda . Ne hade edon nmeh ' a to ' a mere totpa miat niohor walia hya ' mak kaplola me hya ' ed mak khala .
and in knowledge , self-control , and in self-control , perseverance , and in perseverance , godliness , ||| Me miatu miodi plolli la miy inonmi , me miatu mpialeran toto ' memna totpa miy pesiaymi edon nwalera . Yana mhi ' to ' hari mere miatu mliernohor walia Uplerlawna ralma riorni ,
and in godliness , brotherly affection , and in brotherly affection , love . ||| miatu mtiulla-msiayni makpesiay wialmi , la ' walia miatu mtiulla-msiayni rimormior wialmi honona .
For if these things are yours and abound , they make you to not be idle or unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Yoma la'pa mi'itar reria-milawan reria nhioli lieta-ilu wniehwa samomuou ri honona , de hota miy mormiormi maka miat niohora oleka Itmatromni Yesus Kristus de , edon nwal lia hamamuamua mere pesiaymi la ' ga ' a .
For he who lacks these things is blind , seeing only what is near , having forgotten the cleansing from his old sins . ||| Mere la'pa makpesiay die nakleha nhioli-lieta ilu-wniehwa mak kalwiedweda re de , emolmolan nekama riy de yamkekni nmalmualmu onde matni yata yoma emeknekama nhortaplin niohor walia de Uplerlawna Nwuri-nohma oleka e do'oni-halli la ' ululu .
Therefore , brothers , be more diligent to make your calling and election sure . For if you do these things , you will never stumble . ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara miy , mpialiewan toto ' meman totpa nhiolmi-lietmi ilu-wniehwami mak kalwiedweda re erla miy mormiormi , totpena la talan emkade pede mtiut mueman de , plollolli de mior wutga riy maka Uplerlawna Nwalir nian oleka , maka Npolga pa Nhi ' a la E limni-rorni . Yoma la'pa mpiehwa reri-mliakat reria emkade la mormiormi , de hota miy edon mpiadur la pesiaymi .
For thus you will be richly supplied with the entrance into the eternal Kingdom of our Lord and Savior , Jesus Christ . ||| Ne hota Uplerlawna Nreiniana-na'nana Nreililili-na'mamuau miy lia ' ler maka mlier la Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Kristus Ray Makamori-Kalewna lodna lie'enu-hairi liowni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Ne hota Enodi plolli la pa nodi liarni .
Therefore I will not be negligent to remind you of these things , though you know them and are established in the present truth . ||| Miy miat niohor olek walia hare honona , me mpiesiay toto ' meman walia ha plollolli . Mere emkade ho'mana agiwa wuagahniorat rer miy lia ' hare .
I think it right , as long as I am in this tent , to stir you up by reminding you , ||| Yoma la'pa a ' g e muormiori mia'ta de awuarora de lol talanni pa awuagahniorta miy lia ' hare .
knowing that the putting off of my tent comes swiftly , even as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me . ||| Yoma agat niohora de hota edon nalo'on wali ne amuat wia , emeka hya ' maka Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Enakot nohora oleka la mai a ' u .
Yes , I will make every effort that you may always be able to remember these things even after my departure . ||| Pede awualeran pa ukot nohora hari honona tiy miy totpena la ' ler maka amuati oleka wa , de miy edon mhioratdoinia .
For we did n't follow cunningly devised fables when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ , but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , la'pa amakot nohora Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Kristus hota Nmai die Nodia plolli-mneheni , preheni-mkaini , hitita-reprepra de amakot nohora E plolli-mneheni , preheni-mkaini maka a mat mamni namkek memna . Ami edonna mparor neka lira klili-kdiori ka'ohpa-kalahar pa ampahaur nohora la tiy miy .
For he received from God the Father honor and glory when the voice came to him from the Majestic Glory , This is my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased . ||| Mere ami er wal lia hande pa amamkek memna Yesus Amni Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a Nhi ' pa A'nani Yesus Nlernana ya'uli-yawedi , yatota-yawawa . La ' ler de amatlina lira nwatiawua Uplerlawna mak kden la Ilia Hititia-Wat rieprepra Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Nhar lirni la E ' a Niwra , A A'nu maka Asiayni inhatti . E ' ed mak khi ' A ralmu pa uhepuepru .
We heard this voice come out of heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain . ||| Am meh ' a neka matlin rer miemna lir de nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha la ' ler de , maka amor E ' pa mden la wo'or maka Uplerlawna Nwaliri-nwalioha nana .
We have the more sure word of prophecy , and you do well that you heed it as to a lamp shining in a dark place , until the day dawns and the morning star arises in your hearts , ||| Ina-nara , la ' hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nakota la wo'or hananni de , ntut muemna de hya ' mak makwohorulu-ktatrulu rakot nohora olek ulga la ' a Yesus Kristus de ha naplollola . Pede mtia'wa tlinmi la lirni de , yoma lir de ntutga talan mak kaplola tiy miy pia emolmolan nekama wa'du mak kmormior lia melmelli . Hota lir de ntutga talan tiy miy pia la'pa ntut mueman la ' ler maka Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'an pa hota miat nohor memna E ' a . Ha maimiaini de emolmolan nekama lera maka matni npah ' a ne wtion repra mana maka khita-krepra .
knowing this first , that no prophecy of Scripture is of private interpretation . ||| Ina-nara , ononni la ' a hya ' maka a'ukot olek honona re , de totpa mhioratreria de makwohorulu-ktatrulu lirni la Puka ralamni , edonna rwatiawua makwohorulu re lir wamueheni mere ha rwatiawu Uplerlawna .
For no prophecy ever came by the will of man , but holy men of God spoke , being moved by the Holy Spirit . ||| Yoma ita edonna tlernan ma'ta lira mak kwatiawua Uplerlawna maka rimormioria nohkerna rmeh ' a rwaror nana . Mere Uplerlawna Niwra Nakot hadom de , Nala E Nhiw Lululli pa Nodi plolli la rimormiori nanpena nakot nohora hadella rimormior wialli .
But false prophets also arose among the people , as false teachers will also be among you , who will secretly bring in destructive heresies , denying even the Master who bought them , bringing on themselves swift destruction . ||| La ' ululu de makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak edon kaplola rawniotra-rawniah ' a wut lia Israel mniotni . Ne emkade wal pia hota la ' lera-mela ri tungkuru-tungkur mak edon kaplola rler teman tiy miy . Hota ir er maka khi ' a wunwunamnu pa rwatutu-rwaye ' a rira totpena rod ir la klieratni . Ir wniatutnu de ed maka ktot rimormiori la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . Me hota tungkuru mak edon kaplola ri nek de ir reher doinia ir Matromni Yesus mak kodi plolli , maka ktuwu-khai olek ir wa . La hade pede narieiniande hota plinu-plinnianamde rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni .
Many will follow their immoral ways , and as a result , the way of the truth will be maligned . ||| Hota riy rahu rlernohora tungkuru mak edon kaplola re yehwani mak kodia nhioli yatyata-halala mak ka'hira ralma-riorni la pohra-gehpa . Me nhiolli-lietni re hota rhi ' a riy pa rapolu-raliella talan mak kaplola mak kod it la Uplerlawna loini-talanni .
In covetousness they will exploit you with deceptive words , whose sentence now from of old does n't linger , and their destruction will not slumber . ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru re ralamni re rod rer lia kupna-kai re ' a-tniaru , pede rwahaur neka hya ' maka edon kaplola maka irmeh ' a neka rwaror nana , totpena rlernana kupna tiy miy . Mere la ' mahnek memna mak ktoran watghudi Nhi'targ oleka ir genni , ne matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa mana e nmat lia wniei lia ira .
For if God did n't spare angels when they sinned , but cast them down to Tartarus , and committed them to pits of darkness to be reserved for judgment , ||| Ina-nara , mpiaror tek la Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat mak khi ' do ' a-hala . Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu re nek de Uplerlawna edonna Nhortaplinu niukamnu , mere Nhopli-nnaklia ir la ' a hu'ula-lien lawna mak ktuini eti , la melli-kalamni totpena yana rwadur la gen die pa la nte'ela ler meni maka mak ktoran watghudi hota Nmai .
and did n't spare the ancient world , but preserved Noah with seven others , a preacher of righteousness , when he brought a flood on the world of the ungodly , ||| Emkade wal lia ' nohkeran dilla ler ululu , de Uplerlawna edonna Nollia niukum lawna . Uplerlawna Nala gera ktiowru-opli nhia ' a la ' a makden la nohkerna wawannu mak kahmena katlina-katailla E ' a . Mere enekneka Nuh mak kakot nohora mormiori-dardiar maka kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni totpena riy rat niohora nor wut wualia e rom pali re wo'itu er maka kler la mormiori-lewlewna .
and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes , condemned them to destruction , having made them an example to those who would live in an ungodly way , ||| Ne hota emekwalima Sodom nora Gomora . Uplerlawna Nukmua leta rora re , de Nhokla ai pa na ntutin doinia totpena tamkek memna , hota hya ' ed maka riy mak edon katlina-katailla Uplerlawna hota rlernana .
and delivered righteous Lot , who was very distressed by the lustful life of the wicked ||| Mere la ' ler de Uplerlawna Namori-nalewna Lota makden la plol wawna . Lot ralamni namehra-namau niohora riy mak kdunti-kwetria hya ' mak kaplola yoma ir yehwani nodi nhioli yatyata-halala mak ka'hira ralma-rior la pohra-gehpa .
for that righteous man dwelling among them was tormented in his righteous soul from day to day with seeing and hearing lawless deeds , ||| Yoma Lot de riy mak kden la plol wawna pa la'pa enora riy yatyata re rhol wiutu , de la ' lera-ler nekpa tlinni-matni rpen lia nhioli-lieta mak kodia yata-hala , pede e ralamni de namehra-namau niohora .
then the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation and to keep the unrighteous under punishment for the day of judgment , ||| Ina-nara , la ' hare honona pede tamkek memna , de Orgahi-Orha ' a Nodi plolli pa Nalewna riy maka klernohora Uplerlawna wniarorni-wnialaini , la'pa irlernana dundunti-wetwuetru . Ne Orgahi-Orha ' a Nodi plolli wal pia Nukum reri riy yatyata-halala re la ' lera-mela ri , me la ' walia la ler maka Enhudi-npar ir la watghudi lokarni tatiaili-lahannu la lera noha niatni .
but chiefly those who walk after the flesh in the lust of defilement and despise authority . Daring , self-willed , they are not afraid to speak evil of dignitaries , ||| Mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala honona hota rler la niukamnu , mere niukum werweratni hota rala la riy maka khoratreria ralma-riora yatyata-halala mak ka'hira ir inonni la ' a nhioli-lieta kdeha-ktiahli me ralernu-raha ' a hya ' mak inponni la ' ira . Tungkuru ri rpar la ir tullu-petanni pa narieiniande edonna ramta'ata rapolu-raliella Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu maka khitita-kreprepra .
whereas angels , though greater in might and power , do n't bring a slanderous judgment against them before the Lord . ||| Mere Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu mak karuri-ka'orat memna nareh doin la tungkuru maka edonna kaplola ri , nek de edonna rapolu-raliella mak kodi plolli re la ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a gaini ralamni .
But these , as unreasoning creatures , born natural animals to be taken and destroyed , speaking evil in matters about which they are ignorant , will in their destroying surely be destroyed , ||| Mere tungkuru re gahani lawan rehia ! Irapolu-raliella de rakot nohora hya ' ed maka iraplinu rna'erit nohora . Emkade pede ir emolmolan nekama nhiuri-wnia'ana mak edon rwaror nohora hadomdoma mere rlernohora ralma-rior wamueheni nek wa pede rneh pua rwadudlu-rwarerna nohora hya ' maka ha raplinga loini-talanni . Ne emolmolan neka nhiuri-wnia'ana maka ha rhuri-rwa'ana totpena hota rtorna nhor diemade rotna tiernu , de hota tungkuru re rlernan matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
receiving the wages of unrighteousness , people who count it pleasure to revel in the daytime , spots and defects , reveling in their deceit while they feast with you , ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru re hota rlernana mdududga yatyatni-halalli wniahlani . Yoma la'pa lerlera ho'mana ir heparnu de totpena rhi ' a hlie'wani pa rtepra , me inonni pa raprana . La'pa ror miy ramtatan wut lia ya'ana ralamni , de tamkek la yehwani de nhi ' it pa tiwra tamota yoma rma'wu nohora yehwa yatyatni . Hihi'ini-yapyapni kdeheni re rhi'nande rira rakleh oleka yatota-yawawa tiy miy .
having eyes full of adultery , and who ca n't cease from sin , enticing unsettled souls , having a heart trained in greed , accursed children ! ||| Matni re rod reria patke ' a yoma la ralma-rior yatyatni . Ne hota rwehwa-rlakat mamain la do ' a-hala ralamni . Ir rareiniande riy mak pesiayni edon narur mia'ta de , totpa rler la klieratni . Me tungkuru re lera-lera nekpa yeher to ' pa ralamni rod rer tio ' la kupna-kai re ' a-tniaru . La ' hare honona pede Uplerlawna Nhorghal olek ir wa .
Forsaking the right way , they went astray , having followed the way of Balaam the son of Beor , who loved the wages of wrongdoing , ||| Yoma ir rhoitio'or doinia talan mak kaple'era pa rlernohora talan makwohorulu-ktatrulu Bileam , de Beor a'nani de talanni . Bileam di ralamni nod reria kupna-kai maka wniaror yatyatni enni .
but he was rebuked for his own disobedience . A speechless donkey spoke with a man 's voice and stopped the madness of the prophet . ||| Mere Bileam nlernana kniamota la e hihi'ini-yapyapni yatyat de la ' keledai mak kaplinu kaltieri . Mere la ' ler de keledai nora Bileam raltieria rimormiori yaltierni pa nkamota pa narieiniande Bileam de nolin doinia nhiolli-lietni mak kpodku-kpadku de .
These are wells without water , clouds driven by a storm , for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever . ||| Tungkuru-tungkuru mak edon kaplola re ralahar pa rakot targa de hota irodi unut la ' mak klernohor ira , mere hota ir edon rod unut hadomdoma . Emkade pede ir emolmolan nekama ger ormata maka riy riwra ra'al gerni la , mere ger de nkern olekwa , onde wowta kakma mak anin lawna nod lia ' a-nod miai mere hota otna edonna ntur wali . Hota Uplerlawna Nukum ir la gen miaka mel'uta-maliena .
For , uttering great swelling words of emptiness , they entice in the lusts of the flesh , by licentiousness , those who are indeed escaping from those who live in error , ||| Ir kospo'onni pa rala nur mi'nani pa rano ' targa hya'-hya ' to ' a mere lir to ' a de . Rtot riy pa rlernohora ir wniatutnu-wniaye'eni mak kiwra it tlernohora to ' neka hya ' mak ka'hira it ralma-riorni maka rimormior nohkerna wniayowni . Emkade pede raweyat targa riy mak na'nama khoitio'or doin ir do'oni-halli pa rpesiay . Mak kpesiay re emeka i'n mak kiwa kte'la la ainiara , naplin niek la ema rhewra kenna .
promising them liberty , while they themselves are bondservants of corruption , for a man is brought into bondage by whoever overcomes him . ||| Tungkuru re rwatutu-rwaye ' a rira riwra rolin doin olek it la deulu-tatra pede dodo'ondi de itlernohor nek la it ralma-rior wamueheni . Mere tungkuru re nek de rwali olek ata-wa'ara la nhioli-lieta yatyata-halala mak kweyata-kwaniaga . Yoma emeknekama la'pa hya ' ed mak kal it la yawa , de emekwalima hade atni-wa'arni olek it wa .
For if , after they have escaped the defilement of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ , they are again entangled in it and overcome , the last state has become worse for them than the first . ||| Riy mak kat niohora olek Itmatromlawanni Yesus Kristus Makamori-Kalewna ita pede Uplerlawna Nalewna oleka la nohkerna wutwutnu-kokgohonu mak khi ' akdeha rimormiori nohkerna ralma-riorni , mere hota riy de nawali owa'an pa nlernohora nohkeran di yatyatni-halalli , de hota hihi'ini-yapyapni yatyatni-halalli narehi owa'an la ' mak ha nhi ' ul die .
For it would be better for them not to have known the way of righteousness , than after knowing it , to turn back from the holy commandment delivered to them . ||| Ri ' u nee ! Ommuat tiek wa ! Ommuai pia muatg oleka Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka ha rakot nohora tiy miy wia , noma O edonna mtielan nana-muaut nan walia hade ! Samounu de muplin niek ma'ta talan de mak kod o ' a totpa mpual lia riy mak kaplollol la ' Uplerlawna yamkekni !
But it has happened to them according to the true proverb , The dog turns to his own vomit again , and the sow that has washed to wallowing in the mire . ||| Nee ! Hota tungkuru re rawali owa'an la do'oni-halli re edonna nhal et lia lir maka nhi'inde ha rwet la riwra , Ahu nanpena na'an owa'ana motni me Waw miaka itaroh oleka mana , nawal pia nwakloli-nwaklali owa'an la loka-da'la ralamni .
This is now , beloved , the second letter that I have written to you , and in both of them I stir up your sincere mind by reminding you ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , mak kden rer lia a ralmu . Hadi de a hortu re'eni wor tiy miy wia . La ' a hortu woru ri , de a ' g e tiekal rer tiy miy lia wniarora-wnialai mak kaploi-kaple'era .
that you should remember the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets and the commandment of us , the apostles of the Lord and Savior , ||| De a ' g e tiekal pa mhioratreria lira-tunu maka makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka Uplerlawna Nwaliri-nwalioha re rakota la ' ler ululu . Me totpa mhioratreri wiali Itmatromlawanni Makhi ' Ray lia mormiori-lewlewan de lirni-tunnu . Lirni-tunnu de ed mak riy mak kodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re rasul-rasul rakot nohor oleka tiy miy wia .
knowing this first , that in the last days mockers will come , walking after their own lusts ||| A'ukot hadi totpa mhioratreria , hota nhi'pa ntutu-nte'ela lera noha niatni , de riy maka khorat to'ola yatyatni-halalli mak edon kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni , de hota rmai wiali . Hota ir er maka kapolu-kalielan Uplerlawna lirni
and saying , Where is the promise of his coming ? For , from the day that the fathers fell asleep , all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation . ||| pa riwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Nano ' de hota Enmai , mere dodo'ondi de etla meni ? ! It inni-amni it upni-tgarni rmat momuou olek wa . Mere hanek-harahu wuawannu de er ma'ta la pa emekwalima la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayap niana noh marna-lyanit maran di .
For they willfully forget that there were heavens from of old , and an earth formed out of water and amid water by the word of God , by which means the world that existed then , being overflowed with water , perished . ||| Irakot emkade , de rtot pa rhortaplinga de Uplerlawna Nukmu oleka nohkeran di re'eni id ralamni la gera ktiowru-opli nhia ' a . Yoma noh marna-lyanit maran di , de Uplerlawna ed maka kakoki-kayapi niana de Nnair E lirni . Ne Nhi ' nohkeran di de nwatiawua gera me Nnairia gera pa na Nhi ' nohkeran di . Me Uplerlawna Nnair wali gera , mak hota kwal lia gera ktiowru-opli nhia ' a pa Nweyata-nwaniawua nohkeran de la ulul genni .
But the heavens that exist now and the earth , by the same word have been stored up for fire , being reserved against the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men . ||| Ne emeka la ' ler ululu de Uplerlawna Nnairia E lirni pa Nakoki-nayap niana nohkeran di , de Ennair ma'ta E lirni pa Entera-ndema nohkerna totpena la'pa nte'ela ler noha niatni de hota Enala ai na nram doini nohkerna nora lyanit marna pa Nukmua riy yatyata re honona mak edon klernohora E ralma-riorni .
But do n't forget this one thing , beloved , that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years , and a thousand years as one day . ||| Ina-nara mak kden la a ralmu , mhioratreria ! La ' a Orgahi-Orha ' a yamkekni la lera ida de emekwalima anni riwnu ida . Yoma la ' lera ida onde anni riwnu ida yamkekni la Orgahi-Orha ' a de ramneneha .
The Lord is not slow concerning his promise , as some count slowness , but he is patient with us , not wishing that anyone should perish , but that all should come to repentance . ||| La ' hade pede la'pa itwei mia'ta de edon ntutga Orgahi-Orha ' a Nalo'on nohora maka Ha Nakot targ oleka . Meman neka la riy doma nhi'inde rwaror emkade . Mere plollolli de Enwei mia'ta yoma Enwahak pa riy honona rhoitio'ora-rtahnei lia do'oni-halli re . Yoma Enahmen meman pa riy ida nler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni .
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night , in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise , and the elements will be dissolved with fervent heat , and the earth and the works that are in it will be burned up . ||| Mere hota Orgahi-Orha ' a ler maimiaini de emeknekama mak kwuri-kgalmu la mela plin niohora . La'awa ler de , de hota tatlin de ai sapon lawna ida yetanni demade lyanti nmol wua . La lera-wolla mak kden la lyanti honona mana rmutni-rki'ira . La ' walia hanekneka makden la nohkeran de wawannu de emeka ha wniatlena .
Therefore , since all these things will be destroyed like this , what kind of people ought you to be in holy living and godliness , ||| Yoma la ' hare honona wniatni de rakot targ olek hare wa , pede ina-nara , hota emkameni la miy mormiormi ? Mai pia mliernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni pa emeka E kamieheni mak kakleha do ' a-hala nhi'inde rhi ' a .
looking for and earnestly desiring the coming of the day of God , which will cause the burning heavens to be dissolved , and the elements will melt with fervent heat ? ||| Mai pia mhioli-mliet la plol wawna la ' lera-mela ri maka mpiei-mniara Yesus maimiaini maka Uplerlawna Ntutg olek lerni de . Me mkiar totpena plet pa ler de ntutu-nte'ewa . La ' ler de de lyanti ema rtutin doinia , me la ' walia lera-wolla mak kden la lyanti de hota rmadger momuou yoma pahnani lawna .
But , according to his promise , we look for new heavens and a new earth , in which righteousness dwells . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana , twewiei-tnarnara nohkerna nora lyanit marna warwuaru maka Uplerlawna Nano'taru . Nohkerna nora lyanit maran de , it genni-tienni mak warwuaru hade . Ne hota riy mak kdella hande enekneka riy mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Therefore , beloved , seeing that you look for these things , be diligent to be found in peace , without defect and blameless in his sight . ||| La ' hade pede ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden rer lia a ralmu , yoma la ' lera-mela ri , miy mpiei-mniara ler hohoni me nohkerna warwuaru die , mpialiewan toto ' meman pa miy mpial lia riy mak kakleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti la ' Orgahi-Orha ' a yamkekni me totpa miora E ' pa mkialwiedweda .
Regard the patience of our Lord as salvation , even as our beloved brother Paul also , according to the wisdom given to him , wrote to you , ||| Mhioratreria ! Orgahi-Orha ' a e Nhur niohora ma't ita , de emekwalima Enala talan mai ita totpena tlernana mormiori-lewlewna . It mutwualli Paulus mak itsayn de mana , nal oleka horat tiy miy die nakot emkade wali . Enhorta horta re de , enlernana kirkira-ralma-rior samomuou die la Uplerlawna .
as also in all of his letters , speaking in them of these things . In those , there are some things that are hard to understand , which the ignorant and unsettled twist , as they also do to the other Scriptures , to their own destruction . ||| La ' a Paulus horatni honona rde , enakot nohor mamainia wniatutnu ri . La ' horatni lirni dom de riy edonna rna'erit nana . Ne lir mak riy de edonna rna'erit nana , ed maka riy podku ror wutga riy maka pesiayni edon kamtemtemna rwotra-rtal tiarga . La ' a Puka lirni-tunnu dom to ' mana ir rhi ' walia emkade wali . Mere hya ' ed maka ir rhi ' a , de hota natota-nariei pia irmeh ' a rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
You therefore , beloved , knowing these things beforehand , beware , lest being carried away with the error of the wicked , you fall from your own steadfastness . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden la a ralmu , miat niohora oleka tungkuru mak edon kaplola re ha rlolola , pede erammi la temmi . Yana mliernohora ir pa rtot miy lia klieratni . Ir er maka kadunti-kawetria hya ' mak kaplola . Ne la'pa mliernohora de hota miolin doin pesiaymi mak karur die pa mlier la klieratni .
But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ . To him be the glory both now and forever . Amen . ||| Hade emkade pede mpiehwa-mliakat la plol wawna totpena Yesus Kristus de Orgahi-Orha ' a Makhi ' Ray lia mormiori-lewlewan de yeher to ' a pa Ntutga ralam kalwiedni tiy miy . Ne hota mlier pa mihaka totpena miat niohor E ' a . Enden rer lia ya'uli-yawedi la ' dodo'ondi , pa nodi liarni pa la nhoru . Amin Plola . A kalwied mamni , Petrus
That which was from the beginning , that which we have heard , that which we have seen with our eyes , that which we saw , and our hands touched , concerning the Word of life ||| Horat di , de enakot nohor la Mak ha rweta la Uplerlawna Lira Nnio ' a-Wawa Niatnu mak kodia mormiori . E ' ed mak kden la ' a ululu memna , la ' a noha gergera-tatiah ' i ma'ta . Mere ameh ' a neka matlin nana E lirni , me a mat mamni ri mak kamkek E ' a , me la ' walia a lim mamni er mak ktorreria .
and the life was revealed , and we have seen , and testify , and declare to you the life , the eternal life , which was with the Father , and was revealed to us , ||| De la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nalharia Lira Nnio ' a-Wawa Niatnu mak kodia mormiori di , a mat mamni de er maka kamkek la . La ' hade pede amakot nohora E plollolli me amakot nohor walia E ' ed mak kala mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . E ed maka kora it Amlawanni Uplerlawna de rhol wiutu la ' a noha gergera-tatiah ' i mata . Mere dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna Nalharia mai ami .
that which we have seen and heard we declare to you , that you also may have fellowship with us . Yes , and our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son , Jesus Christ . ||| Hya ' a maka amamkeka la a mat mamni me amatlin nana E lirni de amakot nohora walia tiy miy , totpena mrie'ela am pia it tora Yesus Kristus tora Amni tler la ihru ida-ralm ida .
And we write these things to you , that our joy may be fulfilled . ||| Amhorta hari tiy miy totpena it rewre'wa pa tamuki-tahepru toto ' memna .
This is the message which we have heard from him and announce to you , that God is light , and in him is no darkness at all . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali , amlernan lir di la Yesus Kristus pa amakot tiy miy , de Uplerlawna momuounu-witwitanni emeka lelerni me la E ' de , it edon tlernana melmelli-kalkalamni .
If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness , we lie and do n't tell the truth . ||| Pede la'pa itakot tiwra itor wutga E ' a , mere it er ma'ta la melmelli-kalkalamni , de it twali olek la mak kputra-kpalka ka'ohpa-kalahara . Ne it edon tlernohora Uplerlawna wniatutnu plollolli .
But if we walk in the light as he is in the light , we have fellowship with one another , and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son , cleanses us from all sin . ||| Mere la'pa tmori-tdar lia lelerni , pa emekwalia Uplerlawna , de hota itor wutga it pesiay wialli re tla ' ihru ida-ralm ida , ne hota Uplerlawna A'nani Yesus rarni de ed mak kwuri-kohm it la do ' a-hala honona .
If we say that we have no sin , we deceive ourselves , and the truth is not in us . ||| La la'pa he ' niwra e ' edonna nhi ' do ' a-nyap hiala , de e orgahani to ' pa nwutu inon wamueheni ralamni . Ne Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu plollolli mana edon nden la riy de ihranu ralamni .
If we confess our sins , he is faithful and righteous to forgive us the sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness . ||| Mere la'pa itwayow reria it do'oni-halli la Uplerlawna de hota Uplerlawna Nwe'er doinia it la wutwutu-kokgohu ralamni , me Nwuri-nohm it la ' a it do'oni-halli , yoma E edonna Nhoratdoinia E nnio'oni , ne Nhi ' a-nyapia hadom de lol talanni .
If we say that we have n't sinned , we make him a liar , and his word is not in us . ||| Mere la'pa itiwra it edonna tsi ' do ' a-tyap hal la E ' a , de emekwalia ita ttut lir la E ' a tiwra Enputra-npalk ita , me hota la ' hade pede la ' it ihranu ralamni de edonna nko ' i nan etia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
My little children , I write these things to you so that you may not sin . If anyone sins , we have a Counselor with the Father , Jesus Christ , the righteous . ||| U'pu-a'nu mak kden la a ralmu , a ' u'enyat nnio ' u-nia'tu mak emkadi tiy miy , totpena yana miodia inonmi la do ' a-hala ralamni . Mere la'pa riy meni nler olek la do ' a-hala ralamni , de yan mimta'ata yoma it hononita tlernan oleka riy id mak ktulan la ita , de Yesus Kristus mak kakleha do ' a-hala . E ' ed mak kod nian it la ' a E Amni Uplerlawna .
And he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins , and not for ours only , but also for the whole world . ||| Hota la E matmiatni la it do'oni-halli rerieini pa Nhi ' mak ktuw nian-khai nian ita totpena Nwe'er doinia it la do ' a-hala ralamni . Ne hota it edonna tmeh ' a mere rimormiori no ' nohkerna wawannu honona wali mak kreinian E ' a .
This is how we know that we know him , if we keep his commandments . ||| Itat niohor meman de itatg oleka Uplerlawna , hornama itlernohor reria Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
One who says , I know him , and does n't keep his commandments , is a liar , and the truth is n't in him . ||| La ' riy doma de riwra , A ' g e gat niohora Uplerlawna . Mere edonna rlernohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , de hota rweta riy della maka ka'ohpa-kalahara , ne Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu plollolli mana edonna nden la riy de ihranu ralamni .
But God 's love has most certainly been perfected in whoever keeps his word . This is how we know that we are in him , ||| Mere la'pa riy ida nden rer lia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu ralamni , de nnia'eratni de plollola pa entutga ralam kalwiedni la Uplerlawna . Ne hya ' ed mak ktutga itora Uplerlawna ihru ida-ralm ida de emkadille ,
he who says he remains in him ought himself also to walk just like he walked . ||| de edon nakot to ' a la nurnu niwra Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu e ' a mere e nhapartiklia Yesus Kristus ha Nala ' lola .
Brothers , I write no new commandment to you , but an old commandment which you had from the beginning . The old commandment is the word which you heard from the beginning . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden rer lia a ralmu , La'pa a'ukot tiy miy pia idma nhi ' kalwied id de , hya ' ed maka aghorta de ralul pia rhoiya la nnio ' a-niatu warwuaru id hade , mere hade de nnio ' a-niatu maka ha mitlin oleka la ' ler ululu , la ' ler maka mrieiniana Yesus Kristus pa mimpiesiaya .
Again , I write a new commandment to you , which is true in him and in you , because the darkness is passing away and the true light already shines . ||| La ' hade ho'mana nnio ' a-niatu mak aghorta la ' miy di , de ha warwuaru mua'ta walia . Yoma na'nama itamkek nana nnio ' a-niatu yala'ani la Yesus Kristus hihi'ini-yapyapni , wniehwani-liakatni . Ne ramkek nan walia la ' miy mormiormi ralamni . Yoma miy edon mdien olek la do ' a-hala ralamni , mere milola-mila ' a olek la ' talan lelerni . Hade emkade , de emeknekama melmelli-kalkalamni ema rlar doinia la ne repra mana nhar wia .
He who says he is in the light and hates his brother is in the darkness even until now . ||| Riy mak kiwra e ' de nler olek la lelerni , mere edonna nor ma'ta inni-narni makpesiay re rkalwieda , de hota riy de emeknekama mak kwaho ' a-kwahai mia'ta lol melmelli .
He who loves his brother remains in the light , and there is no occasion for stumbling in him . ||| Mere riy maka ktulla-ksayn reria inni-narni , de nler olek la lelerni , pede hya ' maka ha nhi ' a-nyapi mana edonna nodi rimormior de pa nler la do ' a-hala ralamni .
But he who hates his brother is in the darkness , and walks in the darkness , and does n't know where he is going , because the darkness has blinded his eyes . ||| Mere la'pa riy mak edonna nora inni-narni rkalwieda de emekwalima riy mak kwaho ' a-kwahai liol melli , ne hota naplin niohora enlol walli meni . Yoma melmelli-kalkalamni nahewu nan e matni .
I write to you , little children , because your sins are forgiven you for his name 's sake . ||| Aghorta lira-tunu ri tiy miy , mak emolmolan nekama a u'pu-a'nu la ' a pesiay , yoma do'omi-halmi de ramou-rawitn olek wa , la Yesus Kristus hihi'ini .
I write to you , fathers , because you know him who is from the beginning . I write to you , young men , because you have overcome the evil one . I write to you , little children , because you know the Father . ||| Aghorta hari tiy miy , mak emolmolan nekama a na-ama la pesiay yoma miy e miat niohora E ' a maka kden ulg olek la ' a ululu , la noha gergera-tatiah ' i ma'ta . A'ukot nohora hari tiy miy mak emolmolan neka tuwari-laweru yoma mpio'la-mliekur rehi la pesiaya , yoma miy er mak katowra hegana amlawanni de .
I have written to you , fathers , because you know him who is from the beginning . I have written to you , young men , because you are strong , and the word of God remains in you , and you have overcome the evil one . ||| Agal horat di tiy miy mak emolmolan neka a u'pu-a'nu la pesiay yoma miat niohor oleka Uplerlawna makhi ' Am lawan tiy miy . Aghi ' horat tiy miy mak emolmolan neka ina-ama la pesiay yoma miy er mak kat niohora Yesus Kristus makden la ululu , la noha gergera-tatiah ' i ma'ta . Agal horat di tiy miy maka emolmolan neka tuwari-laweru miy , yoma pesiaymi naruri me Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu erla miy ihrami ralamni . Ne miy mitowr oleka hegana amlawanni de .
Do n't love the world or the things that are in the world . If anyone loves the world , the Father 's love is n't in him . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , yana mial ralammi la nohkeran di nora mniotni . Yoma la'pa mial ralammi la nohkeran di , de taken niana mial ralammi tetema pa mliernohora Uplerlawna .
For all that is in the world-the lust of the flesh , the lust of the eyes , and the pride of life-is n't the Father 's , but is the world 's . ||| Yoma nohkeran di re'eni-tniarnu preheni-mkaini ed maka rimormiori ramkeka noma ralma-riorni nko ' i nana . Ne hihi ' a-yapyapi , re ' a-tniaru , preheni-mkaini re rodia rimormiori pa rhi ' atulu-apetna inonni . Nohkerna gahani honona ri , hare edonna rwatiawua Uplerlawna it Amlawanni de , mere ha rden to'ola nohkerna wawannu .
The world is passing away with its lusts , but he who does God 's will remains forever . ||| Hanek-harahu mak etla nohkerna ralamni maka rimormiori ha rwahaka re hota rmol wua . Mere riy maka klernohora Uplerlawna ralma-riorni de , de hota nmormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
Little children , these are the end times , and as you heard that the Antichrist is coming , even now many antichrists have arisen . By this we know that it is the final hour . ||| A'ukot la upa-a'na mak kden la a ralmu miy , de hota noha niatni mana nhi'pa ntutu-nte'ewa . Rakot ulg olek hari tiy miy wia , de hota riy metam keranni ida mak kmalawna Yesus Kristus hota nmai wia la ' lera-mela hohoni ri . Ne dodo'ondi de ho'mana riy mak kmalawna Yesus Kristus harahu er olek di . Hade ed mak kwahniort ita totpa itat niohora lera noha niatni de hota nrehgor pua nte'ewa .
They went out from us , but they did n't belong to us , for if they had belonged to us , they would have continued with us . But they left , that they might be revealed that none of them belong to us . ||| Mak kmalawna Yesus re de riy mak kre ' wal it pa tla ' a krei mutnu mere dodo'ondi de rto'or olek mai ita . Meman neka la rwatiawua krei mutnu mere makpesiay plollolli atia ' ira . Yoma la'pa rpesiay toto ' meman mana , ir edonna ral targ ita . Mere rhoitio'or mai ita , ne ir hihi'ini de ntutga ir de makpesiay atia ' ira .
You have an anointing from the Holy One , and you all have knowledge . ||| Mere Yesus Kristus Mak kakleha do ' a-hala ed mak kalernu Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli la miy wawanmi . Ne la ' hade pede miy hononmi miat niohor oleka Uplerlawna wniatutnu plollolli .
I have not written to you because you do n't know the truth , but because you know it , and because no lie is of the truth . ||| Pede aghi ' horat di tiy miy de a ' g edonna wuarora de miplin niohora lira-tunu maka plollola mere la ' yoma miy e miat niohora olekwa , me onnila miy miana miat niohor walia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak kaplol de , edon nodia wniatutu-wniaye ' a maka putputra-palpalka .
Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ ? This is the Antichrist , he who denies the Father and the Son . ||| Riy meni maka edonna kwayow nohora Yesus , de riy de mak kputra-kpalka inhatta . Riy de niwra , Yesus de , Uplerlawna edon Nano'targa pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori . Riy mak emkare rwali olek mak kmalawna Yesus Kristus . Ir edonna rwayow nohora Yesus Kristus Nor Amni .
Whoever denies the Son does n't have the Father . He who confesses the Son has the Father also . ||| Yoma riy mak edonna kwayow nan Uplerlawna A'nani de edon nora Amni Uplerlawna pa rla ' lir ida . Mere he ' maka kwayow nana Uplerlawna A'nani de emekwalima nreinian oleka Uplerlawna wali pa rla ' lir ida .
Therefore , as for you , let that remain in you which you heard from the beginning . If that which you heard from the beginning remains in you , you also will remain in the Son , and in the Father . ||| La ' hade pede wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak kaplola mak ha mitlin oleka la ' ler maka na'nama miy mpiesiay die , mitiak kalwiedwed harella inonmi . La'pa mliernohor kalwiedweda lira-tunu re , de hota miy mior wutga Uplerlawna Nor A'nani mlia ' lir ida .
This is the promise which he promised us , the eternal life . ||| Ne la'pa itora Uplerlawna Nor A'nani tla ' lir ida , de E ' ed mak kano'targa mai ita , de hota itmormiori-tdardiar plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
These things I have written to you concerning those who would lead you astray . ||| Aghorta hari tiy miy totpa aga wuahniorta miy lia ' riy maka hota klekur wenna pa rodia miy lia klieratni .
As for you , the anointing which you received from him remains in you , and you do n't need for anyone to teach you . But as his anointing teaches you concerning all things , and is true , and is no lie , and even as it taught you , you will remain in him . ||| Mere la'pa twahaur la miy inon wamuehemi , de Yesus Kristus Nhuri oleka Nhiw Lululli tiy miy wia . Ne onnila Uplerlawna Nhiwni de Nden rer tiy miy , de hota riy meheni ho'mana edonna rwatutu-rwaye ' a mak ha riwra wniatutu warwuaru tiy miy . Mere Nhiwni ed maka kwatut miy lia ' a hya ' a-hya ' to ' a , ne hya ' maka Ha Nwatutu-nwaye ' a re , hare raplol momuou ne edon nheik nan etia mak edon kaplola . La ' hade pede mliernohora Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli yawirnu-yawewalli pa mlia mior wutga Yesus Kristus mmiori-mdiar wiutu .
Now , little children , remain in him , that when he appears , we may have boldness and not be ashamed before him at his coming . ||| Hade pede upa-a'na mak kden rer lia a ralmu , lera-lera nekpa mriehgorga Yesus Kristus , totpena la'pa lerni la Yesus Nwatiawua Ilyamou pa Nmai , de hota twatrom de yan tamta'ata ne yan tadede ' ita .
If you know that he is righteous , you know that everyone who practices righteousness has been born of him . ||| Miatg oleka de Uplerlawna Nden nek la plol wawna . Hade pede miat niohor walia Uplerlawna upni-a'nani re , de eneknek to'ama riy mak kden wal lia plol wawna .
See how great a love the Father has given to us , that we should be called children of God ! For this cause the world does n't know us , because it did n't know him . ||| A a'nu miy re , mpiaror nohora Uplerlawna , it Amlawanni de kalwiedni mak karehi-kalawan de mai ita pede Nwayow pa Nhi ' it la upni-a'nani ! Ne naplol pa it di de Uplerlawna upni-a'nani ita . Mere makdella nohkeran di mak edonna kpesiay Uplerlawna , hota edonna rwayow nan it la ' a Uplerlawna upni-a'nani , yoma iraplin niohor ma'ta Uplerlawna .
Beloved , now we are children of God . It is not yet revealed what we will be , but we know that when he is revealed , we will be like him , for we will see him just as he is . ||| Makden la a ralmu miy , it di de Uplerlawna upni-a'nani olek it wa . Mere Uplerlawna edon Nakot ma'ta pede taplin niohora it illu-wniehwani , it irannu-gaini la ' ler maka Yesus Kristus Nmai owa'an de . Mere itatga de la ' ler maka Ha Nmai die , twalia pa it emolmolannek E'ewa yoma la ' ler de itamkek memna E ' inhatta .
Everyone who has this hope set on him purifies himself , even as he is pure . ||| La ' hade pede riy honona mak kha'ar aranni la Yesus maimiaini de , ir er maka katiak reria ir momuounu-witwitanni totpa emolmolan nekama Yesus de momuounu-witwitanni wali .
Everyone who sins also commits lawlessness . Sin is lawlessness . ||| Mak kler la do ' a-hala ralamni re er mak ktolkiai-khakpera Uplerlawna riorni-liaini . Yoma do ' a-hal de ed mak kpera-kdaitia Uplerlawna deullu-tatarni .
You know that he was revealed to take away our sins , and no sin is in him . ||| Miy e miatga Yesus Kristus de Nmai olek pa Nhap dioinia rimormiori do'oni-halli . Ne la ' a E inonni de do ' a-hala edonna nheik nana .
Whoever remains in him does n't sin . Whoever sins has n't seen him and does n't know him . ||| La ' hade pede riy honona maka kor wutga Yesus ihru ida-ralm ida de hota edonna rhi ' reria do ' a-hala . Mere riy maka khi ' reri do ' a-hala , de nnia'eratni de riy de naplin niohora Yesus Kristus nhiolli-lietni me edon nat mua'ta wali Yesus .
Little children , let no one lead you astray . He who does righteousness is righteous , even as he is righteous . ||| Hade pede upa-a'na miy re , yana mliernohora he ' to ' mak kiwra kod miy lia klieratni . Yoma riy maka klernohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de e ' ed mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni pa emolmolan neka Yesus .
He who sins is of the devil , for the devil has been sinning from the beginning . To this end the Son of God was revealed , that he might destroy the works of the devil . ||| Mere riy maka khi'inde khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala de hegana amlawanni a'nani e ' a . Yoma hegana amlawanni natnioman la do ' a-hala la ' ler maka Uplerlawna Nakoki-nayap niana nohkeran di pa nodi liarni . Ne Uplerlawna A'nani Nmai totpena Nmeh ' a nweyata-nwaniawua hegana kniarni .
Whoever is born of God does n't commit sin , because his seed remains in him , and he ca n't sin , because he is born of God . ||| Riy maka kwali olek la Uplerlawna upni-a'nani , de edonna nhi ' reria do ' a-hala yoma Uplerlawna yehwani etla e ' a . Taken niana nhi ' reria do ' a-hala yoma e Amni de Uplerlawna .
In this the children of God are revealed , and the children of the devil . Whoever does n't do righteousness is not of God , neither is he who does n't love his brother . ||| Mere la'pa hameni mak edon khi ' a-kyapia hya ' mak kaplola la Uplerlawna yamkekni onde edonna nhima-nre ' a inni-narni makpesiay re , de riy de Uplerlawna upni-a'nani atia ' hade . Emkade pede itat niohora Uplerlawna upni-a'nani me hegana amlawanni upni-a'nani .
For this is the message which you heard from the beginning , that we should love one another- ||| Upa-a'na miy re , la ' ler maka mrieiniana Yesus Kristus pa mpiesiaya de rakot targ oleka tiy miy wia , totpena miy idma nara ' a-napalga ida .
unlike Cain , who was of the evil one and killed his brother . Why did he kill him ? Because his deeds were evil , and his brother 's righteous . ||| Yan mhi ' emolmolla Kain maka khi ' hegana la amni pa nwenna hyal raralamni . Hya ' ed mak kariei pia Kain nwenna hyallio ? Yoma hya ' maka Kain ha nhi ' a de nhala , mere hya ' maka hyalli ha nhi ' a re de raplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Do n't be surprised , my brothers , if the world hates you . ||| La ' hade pede upa-a'na miy , la'pa rimormiori nohkeran di nagai pietan tiy miy de yan mhiedu .
We know that we have passed out of death into life , because we love the brothers . He who does n't love his brother remains in death . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , itatga de itlergot olek la matmiati ralamni ne it tler olek la mormiori ralamni pa hota itmormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Itat niohor hade , yoma itatu tsi ' kalwiedweda la it inni-narni makpesiay . Mere la'pa he ' maka khi ' yatyatni la ' a inni-narni amni-hyalli , de plol toto ' a riy de ed ma'ta la matmiati ralamni .
Whoever hates his brother is a murderer , and you know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him . ||| Yoma hameni mak kahankeran rer lia amni-hyalli inni-narni makpesiay re , de la Uplerlawna yamkekni de , riy de emekwalima riy mak kwunu-kwen oleka rimormior wialli . Ne miat niohora walia la ' pa riy mak kwunu-kwenna re , de hota edon mormior plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
By this we know love , because he laid down his life for us . And we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers . ||| Yesus Kristus Nmeh ' a Nal inonni pa rwunu-rwenna onnila it rerieini . Ne E ' hihi'ini-yapyapni de ed mak ktutga loi-talan mai ita totpena itat niohor walia la ' a itsi ' kalwiedwed la it inni-narni makpesiay re .
But whoever has the world 's goods and sees his brother in need , then closes his heart of compassion against him , how does God 's love remain in him ? ||| La'pa mak ka'ana-kemnu ida namkek reria mutwualli mak kakleha-kaplara mere edonna ntulla-nsaynia , de hota emkameni la e niwra e nhima-nre ' Uplerlawna ? !
My little children , let 's not love in word only , or with the tongue only , but in deed and truth . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , yana takot to'ola it nurnu onde tanur mi'na tiwra ittulla-itsayni it rimormior wialli . Mere mai pia ittut muemna it ralam kalwiedni la ' a wniehwa-liakta mak kala ya'ana-yemnu lawra-raini la mak kakleha-kaplara .
And by this we know that we are of the truth and persuade our hearts before him , ||| Upa-a'na miy re , la'pa ittulla-tsayni it inni-narni makpesiay re , de itat niohora de itler olek la Uplerlawna a'nani lewatni makden la plol wawna , pede it ihranu ralamni nekane namtiertiernu la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni .
because if our heart condemns us , God is greater than our heart , and knows all things . ||| Mere la'pa mtiulla-msiayni rimormior wialmi mere mimta'at ma'ta yanpa hota Uplerlawna edon Nreinian miy , a'ukot tiy miy die yan mimta'ata , yoma Uplerlawna ralma-riorni nareh nian ita , ne E ' ed mak kat niohora it ralma-riorni wniehwani-liakatni plollolli .
Beloved , if our hearts do n't condemn us , we have boldness toward God , ||| Makden la a ralmu miy , la'pa it ralma-riorni edonna nwaghal ita , de itparan pia tor Uplerlawna tapal wiutu pa itkola tieru-tawur nehla .
so whatever we ask , we receive from him , because we keep his commandments and do the things that are pleasing in his sight . ||| Ne la'pa itwak hadom la E ' a de hota itlernana yoma itsi ' hya ' mak kla ' nana E ralamni me itlernohor memna E nnio'oni-niatnu .
This is his commandment , that we should believe in the name of his Son , Jesus Christ , and love one another , even as he commanded . ||| Maka Ha Nano ' a-na'atga mai ita , de totpa it pesiayni narur tioto ' la ' E A'nani Yesus Kristus ne it mana idma nara ' a-napalga ida pa tlernohora Yesus Kristus lirni-tunnu mai ita .
He who keeps his commandments remains in him , and he in him . By this we know that he remains in us , by the Spirit which he gave us . ||| Rimormiori honona mak katlina-katailla Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu rora Uplerlawna rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida . Ne la ' a Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak Enal oleka la ita pede itat niohor memna Uplerlawna Nor it de emek neka ihi nor kuku .
Beloved , do n't believe every spirit , but test the spirits , whether they are of God , because many false prophets have gone out into the world . ||| Makden rer lia a ralmu miy , yan memmemna mpiesiaya he'-he ' a to ' a mak kiwra la ihranu ralamni de e npenpuen lia Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli pede riwra rwatut miy . Mere mhiudi-mpiar teka plein nhiwni de plollolli , de nhiw maka kden la ir de plola pa nwatiawua Uplerlawna , me yanpa edonna . Yoma la ' meni-meni to ' a de riy harahu rtot pa rwal lia makwohorulu-ktatrulu mere ha rod tio ' riy la klieratni .
By this you know the Spirit of God , every spirit who confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God , ||| Mhiudi-mpiar tek ira totpena miat niohora la wniehwani de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak hameni . De riy maka kwayow pa kakot nohora Yesus Kristus Nerun la nohkeran di de emolmolla rimormiori , de riy de lirni de nwatiawua Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli .
and every spirit who does n't confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not of God , and this is the spirit of the Antichrist , of whom you have heard that it comes . Now it is in the world already . ||| Mere riy maka edonna nwayow nana Yesus Nmai die emolmolla rimormiori , de riy de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli edonna nden la ha ralamni . Mere nhiwa mak kden la riy de , emolmolan wali makden la riy metam keranni mak hota kmai pia kora Yesus Kristus kwahapra lia'ara-kwatoran wehla ra'ara . Mitlin oleka de hota nhiwa-nhion yatyat de nmai . Ne plollolli de la lera-mela ri de ed olek la nohkeran di wawannu .
You are of God , little children , and have overcome them , because greater is he who is in you than he who is in the world . ||| Mere upa-a'na miy , Uplerlawna Nherti olek miy wia . Ne miy di ed mak ktowra kwayotlia olek makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak edon kaplola re . Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak kden tiy miy , de Narehi mieman la hegana amlawanni mak kodi plolli la riy maka nohkerna gahani re .
They are of the world . Therefore they speak of the world , and the world hears them . ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak edon kaplola re rora nohkerna rla ' lir ida , pede raltier niohora mamaini nohkerna yala'ani . Ne riy nohkerna mana rheri tlinni la ira wniatutnu-wniaye'eni .
We are of God . He who knows God listens to us . He who is not of God does n't listen to us . By this we know the spirit of truth , and the spirit of error . ||| Mere makodi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu am die , de Uplerlawna upni-a'nani ami . Ne riy mak katg oleka Uplerlawna de hota ratlin mai ami . Mere riy maka Uplerlawna gahani atia ' a de ed mak edon katlin mai ami . La ' emkadella tamkek nana takniau reria riy maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la pa Nwatutu-nwaye ' a ha plollola onde maka hegana amlawanni nden la pa nodia kdiori-kdieha pa nodi it la klieratni .
Beloved , let 's love one another , for love is of God , and everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God . ||| U'pu-a'nu mak kden rer lia a ralmu , mai pia it idma nhi ' kalwied ida yoma kalwieda ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna . Riy maka khi ' kalwied la e rimormior wialli de Uplerlawna upni-a'nani hade , me enat niohora Uplerlawna .
He who does n't love does n't know God , for God is love . ||| Riy mak edonna ktulla-ksayni e rimormior wialli , de edonna nat niohora Uplerlawna yoma Uplerlawan de kalwieda inhat E ' a .
By this God 's love was revealed in us , that God has sent his only born Son into the world that we might live through him . ||| Ne Uplerlawna Ntutga sniayanni de mai ita , yoma E ' ed mak khopan pa E A'nani memeheni de , Wutmueha-Laimieh de , Nerun la nohkerna wawannu , totpena itlernana mormiori la A'nani de .
In this is love , not that we loved God , but that he loved us , and sent his Son as the atoning sacrifice for our sins . ||| Kalwieda de edonna nwatiawu ita pa it ttutga la Uplerlawna , mere Uplerlawna ed maka ksayn ita pede Nhopna A'nani pa Nmai , totpena la ' E matmiatni de pede Ntuw niana-nhai nian ita totpa itawnie'er la do ' a-hala ralamni .
Beloved , if God loved us in this way , we also ought to love one another . ||| U'pu-a'nu mak kden la a ralmu , onnila Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni mak kareh mieman de mai ita pede it mana ttut wual hadella it rimormior wialli .
No one has seen God at any time . If we love one another , God remains in us , and his love has been perfected in us . ||| Riy id mana edonna namkek ma'ta Uplerlawna , mere la'pa it idma nhi ' kalwiedwed la ida , de itor Uplerlawna tla ihru ida-ralm ida . Ne E kalwiedni nkar lia it ralamni pede it idma ntulla-nsayni ida me it tsima-tre ' it rimormior wialli me Uplerlawna wali , pa emekwalima hya ' mak kla ' nan Uplerlawna ralamni .
By this we know that we remain in him and he in us , because he has given us of his Spirit . ||| Uplerlawna Nal oleka Nhiw Lululli mai ita . La ' talan emkade pede itat niohora la ' it mormiorni di tor oleka Uplerlawna pa twal lia ida me emekwalima Enmai tiemn ita .
We have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son as the Savior of the world . ||| Ne hya ' wali de a orgah miamni nek de mamkek oleka Uplerlawna A'nani , ne amod kiot la ' riy amiwra E Amni ed maka khopan pa Nmai pia Namori-nalewna nohkeran di mniotni .
Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God , God remains in him , and he in God . ||| Pede he ' ed mak kiwra Yesus de Uplerlawna A'nani , de riy de mana nor oleka Uplerlawna ihru ida-ralm ida .
We know and have believed the love which God has for us . God is love , and he who remains in love remains in God , and God remains in him . ||| It orgahani mana tat wualia Uplerlawna Nsayn ita me itsa'ar it aranni la E kalwiedni de . Yoma Uplerlawan de kalwieda inhatta pede riy mak khima-kre ' reria Uplerlawna me e rimormior wialli de , riy de nora Uplerlawna rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
In this , love has been made perfect among us , that we may have boldness in the day of judgment , because as he is , even so we are in this world . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , ittulla-tsayni it rimormior wialli pa emekwalima mak kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni totpena itparan pia pa twatrom la Uplerlawna la ' lerni la Nhud it la watghudi lokarni , yoma it mormiorni mai nohkeran di de emekwalima Yesus Kristus mormiorni-dardiarni .
There is no fear in love , but perfect love casts out fear , because fear has punishment . He who fears is not made perfect in love . ||| Riy maka Uplerlawna kalwiedni nwah ' a nana , de edon namta'at eti yoma kalwieda plolli mak kla ' Uplerlawna ralamni ed maka kdeh ' a doinia kahal doini yamta'ata la ihranu ralamni . Nhi'inde rimormiori ramta'ata Uplerlawna yoma rwaror nohora la ' a E ' ed mak ktorna watghudi gaini ralamni . Pede he ' maka kamta'at Uplerlawna nhiudni-pniarni de , Uplerlawna kalwiedni edon penpuen ma't la ihranu ralamni .
We love him , because he first loved us . ||| Itsi ' kalwied la rira me itsima-tre ' a Uplerlawna yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kala ' ul pua Ntutga kalwiedni mai ita .
If a man says , I love God , and hates his brother , he is a liar , for he who does n't love his brother whom he has seen , how can he love God whom he has not seen ? ||| Mere la'pa he ' mak kiwra , A di de ghima-rie ' a Uplerlawna , mere edonna nora inni-narni makpesiay re rkalwieda , de riy de nalahara . Yoma riy maka edonna khima-kre ' a inni-narni amni-hyalli maka kayamkeka de hota emkameni la enhima-nre ' a Uplerlawna mak edonna kayamkeka ? !
This commandment we have from him , that he who loves God should also love his brother . ||| Ne lira-nnio ' a nwatiawua Uplerlawna pa nmai it de niwra , La'pa he ' mak kiwra nhi ' kalwiedweda Uplerlawna de nhi ' wal lia inni-narni amni-hyalli .
Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God . Whoever loves the Father also loves the child who is born of him . ||| Upa-a'na miy re , he'-he ' to ' mak kpesiay Yesus de Ray miaka Uplerlawna Nano'taru pa Namori-nalewna rimormior inhatta , riy de ed maka rhoiya la Uplerlawna upni-a'nani . La'pa itsi ' kalwieda la riy inni-amni , de hota itsi ' kalwied walia riy de walli .
By this we know that we love the children of God , when we love God and keep his commandments . ||| Emkade walia la'pa itsi ' kalwieda la Uplerlawna me tatu tatlina-tatailla E lirni-tunnu de , de itat niohor walia itsi ' kalwied walia la ' Uplerlawna upni-a'nani .
For this is loving God , that we keep his commandments . His commandments are not grievous . ||| Yoma la'pa itlernohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu de emekwalima itsi ' kalwieda la Uplerlawna . Ne E lirni-tunnu edonna nhi ' awert ita .
For whatever is born of God overcomes the world . This is the victory that has overcome the world , your faith . ||| Yoma he ' to ' mak kla ' Uplerlawna upni-a'nani , de e ' ed maka karu ' u-katowra kwayotlia nohkeran di yatni-halli yoma npesiay Yesus Uplerlawna A'nani de .
Who is he who overcomes the world , but he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God ? ||| Hota he ' ed maka kparan pia katowar nana nohkeran dina de ? Riy mak katowra nohkeran di , de enekneka riy mak kpesiay Yesus riwra , Yesus de Uplerlawna A'nani inhatta .
This is he who came by water and blood , Jesus Christ , not with the water only , but with the water and the blood . It is the Spirit who testifies , because the Spirit is the truth . ||| Yesus Kristus ed mak kmai lia nohkerna pa rala gera rharania me totpena Nmati ne rarni naktiowur doin la . Enmai die edonna rharania la gera nmeh ' a to ' a mere Nala inonni pa rwenna ne rarni naktiowur doin walia . Ne Uplerlawna Nhiwni ed mak kaplol nohora Yesus . Yoma Uplerlawna Nhiwni de edon Nakot targa lir lalahara .
For there are three who testify , ||| Pede mak ktutrier niohora saksi Yesus Kristus de wotelg hare ,
the Spirit , the water , and the blood , and the three agree as one . ||| de Uplerlawna Nhiwni , gera nhiarani me Yesus rarni . Mantetelu re rewre'wa pa lir ida .
If we receive the witness of men , the witness of God is greater , for this is God 's testimony which he has testified concerning his Son . ||| Nhi'inde itpesiay rimormior mak ktutrier nohora saksi pa rala lin nohora-mat nohora hihi ' a-yapyapi ida , mere lira maka Uplerlawna Nakota de ed maka karuri-kalai pia krehi rimormiori lirni yoma Uplerlawna E ' a . Ne E nakot nohora la A'na wamueheni wawannu .
He who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself . He who does n't believe God has made him a liar , because he has not believed in the testimony that God has given concerning his Son . ||| La ' hade pede riy makpesiay Uplerlawna A'nani de , nat niohor memna hya ' ed maka Uplerlawna Nakota re la ' a A'nani naplola . Mere riy maka edonna kpesiay Uplerlawna , de emeknekama nhoi Uplerlawna la mak ka'ohpa-kalahara , yoma edon npesiay hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nakot nohora la A'nani wawannu .
The testimony is this , that God gave to us eternal life , and this life is in his Son . ||| Ne emkadilla maka Uplerlawna Nakot nohora re , de Uplerlawna Nal olek mormiori mak kodi liarni mai ita , ne A'nani ed mak kodia mormiori die .
He who has the Son has the life . He who does n't have God 's Son does n't have the life . ||| Riy maka kora Uplerlawna A'nani rla ihru ida-ralm ida , hota rmormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni . Riy mak edon nora Uplerlawna A'nani ihru ida-ralm ida de edon nler la mormiori die .
These things I have written to you who believe in the name of the Son of God , that you may know that you have eternal life , and that you may continue to believe in the name of the Son of God . ||| Agal horat la makpesiay Uplerlawna A'nani miy , de totpena miatga de miy di de mliernan oleka mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
This is the boldness which we have toward him , that if we ask anything according to his will , he listens to us . ||| Hade pede itparan pia tsumbain la Uplerlawna yoma itpesiaya de hota Enreiniana-na'nan it sniumbainni la'pa itwak to ' a hya ' maka kla ' nana E ralamni .
And if we know that he listens to us , whatever we ask , we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him . ||| Pede hota la'pa itsi ' emkade , de tat muemna de Enal olek hya ' maka twaka la E ' a .
If anyone sees his brother sinning a sin not leading to death , he shall ask , and God will give him life for those who sin not leading to death . There is sin leading to death . I do n't say that he should make a request concerning this . ||| Pede la'pa mimkek nana ita inni-narni ida nler la do ' a-hala , mak edon nodia riy della matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa , de msiumbain la Uplerlawna totpa Namori-nalewna , ne hota Uplerlawna Ntemna mormiori plalahwa della e limmi ralamni . Hadi ed maka ha mhi ' a la riy maka do'oni-halli edonna nodia matmiati plalahwa . Mere do ' a-hala id ed ma'ta mak kodi riy pa rler la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa . La eda de , de a ' g edonna ukot nohor tiy miy , totpena msiumbain la Uplerlawna .
All unrighteousness is sin , and there is sin not leading to death . ||| Nhioli-liet mak khala honona de do ' a-hala hare . Mere do ' a-hala honona re edonna rodia riy la matmiati-molmuolu plalahwa .
We know that whoever is born of God does n't sin , but he who was born of God keeps himself , and the evil one does n't touch him . ||| Itatg oleka la riy honona mak kla ' oleka Uplerlawna upni-a'nani de hota edonna nhi ' reri do ' a-hala , yoma Uplerlawna A'nani Nahlili-nalakam reria re , pede hegana amlawanni edon na'ala rpa nodia la klierat lawna .
We know that we are of God , and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one . ||| Riy mai nohkeran di , de rru ' g olek la hegana nayanni . Mere itatga de , it di de Uplerlawna gahani olek it wa .
We know that the Son of God has come and has given us an understanding , that we know him who is true , and we are in him who is true , in his Son Jesus Christ . This is the true God and eternal life . ||| Tatga de Uplerlawna A'nani Nmai olek wa me Nakot nohor hare honona mai it wa totpena tat niohora Uplerlawna mak kaplola inhatta . Ne itora Uplerlawna inhatta tla ' ihru ida-ralm ida , me tor wut wualia A'nani Yesus Kristus tla ' lir ida . Hade ed mak ha rweta la Uplerlawna mak kaplola inhatta me E Nmeh ' a neka ed mak kala mormiori plalahwa pa nodi liarni .
Little children , keep yourselves from idols . ||| Hade pede upa-a'na mak kden rer lia a ralmu , awuak tiy miy die totpena olietmi la kniola tieru-niawur nehla la uplera-upmati ! A kalwie'du , Yohansi
The elder , to the chosen lady and her children , whom I love in truth , and not I only , but also all those who know the truth , ||| La ' a patke ' a mak Uplerlawna Nwalir niana me la ' walia upni-a'nani , kalwiedo ! A ' di de mak khi ' o'ta-mat la krei wokni-le'enu me mak kal toto ' memna a ralmu tiy miy . Hota A ' g edonna mueh ' a mere la ' walia riy honona mana mak kat niohor oleka Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak kaplola , ir ralamni rden rer walia tiy miy wiali .
for the truth 's sake , which remains in us , and it will be with us forever , ||| Yoma Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak kaplola nden rer lia it hononit ralamni . Ne hota itmor niohor E lirni-tunnu de pa nodi liarni .
Grace , mercy , and peace will be with us , from God the Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ , the Son of the Father , in truth and love . ||| Awuak de Uplerlawna , it Amlawanni de , nor E A'nani Yesus Kristus rtutga ralam kalwiedni mai ita pede rala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni mai ita maka kpesiaya Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak kaplola , me ksayni rimormior wialli .
I rejoice greatly that I have found some of your children walking in truth , even as we have been commanded by the Father . ||| A'uhepur memna yoma a'utlin nan de a i'nu upni-a'nani doma e rlernohora Uplerlawna talanni mak kaplola pa rhi ' nana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nakot targa la mai ita .
Now I beg you , dear lady , not as though I wrote to you a new commandment , but that which we had from the beginning , that we love one another . ||| La ' hade pede , awuak pa i'nu makden rer lia a ralmu la'pa makpesiay re honona pa mdien rer lia nhioli-lieta kalwieda . Yana mpiarora de hya ' maka a'ukota di lira nnio ' a-wawa niatu warwuaru hadi . Mere itlernan olek hade wa la ' a ler maka tler la pesiayni de , de totpena it idma nhi ' kalwiedwed ida .
This is love , that we should walk according to his commandments . This is the commandment , even as you heard from the beginning , that you should walk in it . ||| Kalwieda-paitiota yala'ani de totpena tmormiori lia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu . Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka mitlin oleka la ler mak na'nama mpiesiaya , de totpa mhi ' kalwiedweda rimormior wialmi .
For many deceivers have gone out into the world , those who do n't confess that Jesus Christ came in the flesh . This is the deceiver and the Antichrist . ||| Mhioratreria ! Riy liawanni rhoitio'or doin oleka krei-krei re pa rla rodia kdiori-kdieha la ' noheri woru . Hare er mak kiwra Yesus Kristus de Nler la nohkeran di de edonna Nwal lia rimormiori . Riy mak kakot emkade de riy kdiori-kdieha irhatta , ne ir er mak kora Yesus Kristus rwahapra lia'ara-rwadawar wehla ra'ara .
Watch yourselves , that we do n't lose the things which we have accomplished , but that we receive a full reward . ||| La ' hade pede mi'ererma , yanpa irod miy lia klieratni pede hota miy edon mliernana pesiay wniahlani maka Uplerlawna Nala la riy mak khima-kre ' E ' a . Mitiak reria totpena hota mliernan pripanni-fa'anni re honona .
Whoever transgresses and does n't remain in the teaching of Christ does n't have God . He who remains in the teaching has both the Father and the Son . ||| Riy mak edonna ktorreria Yesus Kristus lirni-tunnu , mere rlernohora wniatutu-wniaye ' a doma to ' a , riy de edonna nor la Uplerlawna . Mere riy maka kden rer lia tlina-taili la Yesus lirni-tunnu , de riy de nora Uplerlawna me A'nani rla ' ihru ida-ralm ida .
If anyone comes to you and does n't bring this teaching , do n't receive him into your house , and do n't welcome him , ||| Emkade pede riy rmai pia rodia wniatutu-wniaye ' maka Yesus edonna Nakot targa tiy miy , de yan memmemna mrieiniana la rommi nayanni pa ranin la hande . Me yan memmemna mpiak kalwied la emeka mpia'ina-mpianar la ' a woka ida .
for he who welcomes him participates in his evil deeds . ||| Yoma la'pa itreiniana riy mak emkare , de emekwalima it tor ir pa lir id la yatyatni-halalli .
Having many things to write to you , I do n't want to do so with paper and ink , but I hope to come to you and to speak face to face , that our joy may be made full . ||| Harahu meman pa agiwra ukota tiy miy , mere awuarora de yana ghi ' horta . Ne pena alier teman nek la miy lia hande totpena amueh ' a ultier niohora hare honona totpena it rewre'wa tamuki-tahepru toto ' memna .
The children of your chosen sister greet you . Amen . ||| Patke ' mak kor miy pia mpia'ina-mpia'ela maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana de , upni-a'nani e rwak kalwieda tiy miy ! A kalwie'du , Yohansi
The elder to Gaius the beloved , whom I love in truth . ||| Hya'lu Gayus mak kden rer lia a ralmu ! A ' g ed mak khi ' nana horat di lirni . A ' di de mak khi ' o'ta-mat la krei wokni-le'enu , me mak kal toto ' memna ralamni tiy o ' a .
Beloved , I pray that you may prosper in all things and be healthy , even as your soul prospers . ||| Asiumbain de awuakwak pa hya'lu nden la kalwiedwedni me inonmu yana namehra mere mururi pa emekwalima pesiaymu naruri olek wali .
For I rejoiced greatly when brothers came and testified about your truth , even as you walk in truth . ||| A'ukot hadi yoma a'uhepur meman la ' a makpesiay doma rmai pia rwahaur nohora o ' de , riwra omdien rer lia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak kaplola . Ne plollolli de o mormiormu de nlernohora Uplerlawna wniatutnu-wniaye'eni .
I have no greater joy than this , to hear about my children walking in truth . ||| La'pa a'utlin nana a u'pu-a'nu he ' to ' a makpesiay pa rlernohor reria Uplerlawna talanni de , ed maka katota-kariei pia a ralmu nahepur memna .
Beloved , you do a faithful work in whatever you accomplish for those who are brothers and strangers . ||| Hya'lu makden rer lia a ralmu , o kalwiedmu pa mdien rer lia ra'amu-palmu himimmu-rere'emu la mutwualmu makpesiay , mak kla ' a-kmai re , kennama o edon muat niohor ma'ta hare .
They have testified about your love before the assembly . You will do well to send them forward on their journey in a way worthy of God , ||| It mutwualli re rwahaur momuog oleka o kalwiedmu honona la krei mutnu mai handi . Awuak hota mtiulan owa'an la ira totpena rlernan talan pa rodi liarni la ' a Uplerlawna kniarni ralamni . Emkade pede mhi ' samomuou ira yoma hade ed maka kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni .
because for the sake of the Name they went out , taking nothing from the Gentiles . ||| Yoma rla ' pa rod kiota-ral de'et la Yesus Kristus lirni-tunnu la riy mak edon kpesiay ma'ta . Mere rahmena rwak pa riy mak edon kpesiay ma'ta re rala kniar die wniahlani la ira .
We therefore ought to receive such , that we may be fellow workers for the truth . ||| La ' hade pede it makpesiay , de tre ' pa tara ' a-tapalga tsima-tre ' a ita mutwualli mak kakot nohora Yesus lirni-tunnu totpena la ' talan emkade pede itre ' wal lia ir pa takot nohora Uplerlawna wniatutu plollolli .
I wrote to the assembly , but Diotrephes , who loves to be first among them , does n't accept what we say . ||| A ' g u'enyatg oleka horta id la krei mutnu la ' hande , mere Diotrefes mak kiwra kla o'tani la krei mutnu , nahmena nlernohor ami .
Therefore , if I come , I will call attention to his deeds which he does , unjustly accusing us with wicked words . Not content with this , he does n't receive the brothers himself , and those who would , he forbids and throws out of the assembly . ||| La ' hade pede pena atiy pia a'ukot nohora Diotrefes hihi'ini-yapyapni yatyatni totpena krei mutnu rat niohora de nhi'inde enapolu-naliella ami . Ne hade edon nmeh ' a mere la lera it mutwualli mak rod kiota-ral de'eta Yesus lirni-tunnu rmai , noma Diotrefes edonna nreiniana re . Ne la'pa it inni-narni mak kiwra kreiniana mak kod kiota-kal de'eta Yesus lirni re , Diotrefes la npolliohora ina-nara re me nhopan pa rlergot la roma-krei .
Beloved , do n't imitate that which is evil , but that which is good . He who does good is of God . He who does evil has n't seen God . ||| Hyalia mak kden la a ralmu , yan memmemna mtiolliohora nhioli-liet yatyata . Mere mliernohora hya ' maka kodia kalwiedni . Riy maka kholi-klet kalwiedweda re , Uplerlawna gahani hare . Mere riy maka khi ' a-kyapia yatyatni-halalli de , hare raplin mua'ta Uplerlawna .
Demetrius has the testimony of all , and of the truth itself , yes , we also testify , and you know that our testimony is true . ||| Mere hyalia , makpesiay honona re ra'ulia Demetrius . Ne e ' mana nlernohor mamaini Uplerlawna lirni mak kaplola pede ntutga e ' de riy samomuou e ' a . Am miana ma'uli wiali e ' a . Ne totpa hya'lu nat wualia , de hya ' maka amakota re de riy rpesiaya re yoma ha plollola re .
I had many things to write to you , but I am unwilling to write to you with ink and pen , ||| Harahu memna agiwa ukot nohora tiy o ' a mere awuarora de yana akenia la horta .
but I hope to see you soon . Then we will speak face to face . Peace be to you . The friends greet you . Greet the friends by name . ||| Awuak de hota edon nalo'on wali ne itwatroma , ne totpena itapal wiut mueman pa twahauru .
Jude , a servant of Jesus Christ , and brother of James , to those who are called , sanctified by God the Father , and kept for Jesus Christ , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak Uplerlawna Npolga totpa mpial lia E mutnu . Miy er maka it Amlawanni Uplerlawna Nsayni yoma miora E ' pa mlia ' ihru ida-ralm ida , me Enatiak reri miy totpena Nhi ' miy pia mpial lia Yesus Kristus gah wamueheni . Mak khima-kre ' a Yesus Kristus tulanni-kniarni , a ' u Yudas , Yakowsi hyalli .
May mercy , peace , and love be multiplied to you . ||| Awuak de Uplerlawna hota e Ntut muemna ralam kalwiedni tiy miy pia Nhurriernia kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy . Ne hota Entulan miy pia miatu mtiulla-msiayn meman walia rimormiori wialmi .
Beloved , while I was very eager to write to you about our common salvation , I was constrained to write to you exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered to the saints . ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kden rer lia a ralmu , agiwra meman pa aghi ' horat di tiy miy de a ' g e ukot nohora mormiori-lewlewna maka it rewre'wa tlernan olek de . Mere awuaror owa'an de a ralmu ed mak khopan pa uno ' a-unat plein miy lia tungkuru mak edon kaplola re . Pede agal horat di tiy miy totpena yeher to ' pa miod niana lira-tunu mak kaplola maka mpiesiay oleka de . Uplerlawna Nal olek lirni-tunnu re tiy miy wia . Ne Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re ha rden rer niek la ler maka Ha Nala la ' E mutnu-rahanu , la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lera-mela noha niatni . Hade pede mtiorrer pitpitga hare .
For there are certain men who crept in secretly , even those who were long ago written about for this condemnation , ungodly men , turning the grace of our God into indecency , and denying our only Master , God , and Lord , Jesus Christ . ||| Uno ' a-unat hadi tiy miy yoma riy doma rlol wunwunamnu pa rler teman tiy miy totpa rwatut miy lia klieratni . Ir rahmen memna ratlina-ratailla Uplerlawna . Ir er maka kwotra-ktal tiarga Uplerlawna wniatutnu la ' a E kalwiedni mai ita . Ir riwra onnila Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pede Enamou-nawitna it do'oni-halli , la ' hade pede hota la'pa itsi ' a-tyapi nieka yalira-yaliai yaretyata-yahawyata de hota Uplerlawna edonna Nukm ita . Ne irwayotlia Yesus Kristus mak kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu . Mere Itmatromlawanni E ' inhatta . La ululu memna de Puka lirni enakot nohora tungkuru re niukamnu .
Now I desire to remind you , though you already know this , that the Lord , having saved a people out of the land of Egypt , afterward destroyed those who did n't believe . ||| Ina-nara , miy miat niohor memn oleka la ' a hya ' maka riy mak kmormiori lia ler ululu ha rlernan de . Mere awuagahniort owa'ana miy lia hade . Orgahi-Orha ' a Namori-nalewna Israel mutnu-rahanu makden la Mesir , mere emkade ho'mana la'pa Orgahi-Orha ' a Namori-nalewna ir pa nhorwua noma Nkowa-nwalia mak kakleha pesiay la ' ir mutnu temanni .
Angels who did n't keep their first domain , but deserted their own dwelling place , he has kept in everlasting bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day . ||| Mhioratrer wial wia Uplerlawna hopopanni malaikat maka kpera-kdait doinia ir genni-tienni , pa narieiniande genni re rahgali . Uplerlawna ed mak kenia ranti la hopopan re limni dewade Nkenia la gen miaka mel'uta-maliena . Hota rwutu-rkohoga pa nodi liarni . Rden nek la hande pa rwei lia lera hohoni maka ha retlia ira niukamnu .
Even as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around them , having in the same way as these given themselves over to sexual immorality and gone after strange flesh , are shown as an example , suffering the punishment of eternal fire . ||| Mhioratrer wialia leta Sodom nora Gomora , nor wutga leta-let maka kpahelieli re . Hota emkade walia la ' ira . Ira mniotni rhi ' a-ryap nieka nhioli-lieta yatyata-halala , yoma ralira-raliai , raretyata-rahawyata , rwadu'ul wutu pede rala ai mormiori ra rtunu-rharna totpena ra rwahniorta rimormiori re honona la ' a Uplerlawna niukum lawanni la ai mormiori ralamni mak kod pia nodi liarni . Niukum de ed maka riy yatyata-halala hota rlernana .
Yet in the same way , these also in their dreaming defile the flesh , despise authority , and slander celestial beings . ||| Emkade wal lia riy mak kmai ktieman tiy miy ri , rhi ' a-ryapia yatyatni-halalli . Iralahar pa riwra Uplerlawna Nala mi'ini pa Nwayow nohora ir yehwani yatyatni re pede orgahi rhi ' owa'an nhiol yatyata mak ka'hira ralma-riorni . Irahmena ratlina-ratailla he ' ed maka inponni la ' ira me rapolu-raliella Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu maka khitita-kreprepra .
But Michael , the archangel , when contending with the devil and arguing about the body of Moses , dared not bring against him an abusive condemnation , but said , May the Lord rebuke you ! ||| Mere Mikhail , makhi ' o'tani la Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat re honona mana , edonna nhi ' targa nhioli-lieta mak kapolu-kaliella . La ' lera Mikhail nora hegana amlawanni rawo'or nohora hota he ' ed maka klernan Musa mak kmat die inonni , de Mikhail edonna nparan pia nala lir yalernu-yaha ' a pa nwaghala hegana amlawanni . Enekneka Mikhail nakot la , Hota Orgahi-Orha ' a Nkamota-nkamara o ' a !
But these speak evil of whatever things they do n't know . They are destroyed in these things that they understand naturally , like the creatures without reason . ||| Mere riy maka kmai ktieman tiy miy re , rnairia lira-tunu yalernu-yaha ' a hya ' maka iraplinu rna'erit nohora . Ne irlernohor neka hya ' mak ka'hira ralma-riorni emeknekama oha-ahu maka kakleh wniarora-wnialai mak khe'du nan ira . Do ' a-hala ri er mak kareiniande irlernana tniu'tu-liewru hukum berat mak kwakoha-kwananna .
Woe to them ! For they went in the way of Cain , and ran riotously in the error of Balaam for hire , and perished in Korah 's rebellion . ||| Hota rmat wie ! Iremun la Kain , mak khi ' yatyatni la hyalli de larni . Ir emolmolan neka Bileam pa ir sukni-sukni de rtota riy lia klieratni yoma rwahak neka kupna-kai . Hota rlernana yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani pa emekwalima riy de mak kwawa Korah maka kmalawan la o'ta-mata mak kodi plolli la ' ler ululu .
These are hidden rocky reefs in your love feasts when they feast with you , shepherds who without fear feed themselves , clouds without water , carried along by winds , autumn trees without fruit , twice dead , plucked up by the roots , ||| La'pa miy makpesiay miwok pa mi'ina-miemun pa mhioi-mtiania yamanna mak ktutga miy idma ntulla-nsayni ida , de tungkuru mak edon kaplola re rler teman tiy miy . La ' ya'ana mutu pepanni de ir edon rwarei-rwadan nohor walia miy onde Uplerlawna . Wniehwani de ra'ana roro ' a-rawriawnu ne idma edon nwei ida . Edon rtulan la ir rimormior wialli mere rwaror nohor neka inon wamueheni . Ir er maka kweyata-kwaniawu pua emeknekama watu lalawna mak karei piede puou-kapli rler la kowlora-pah ' a meti . Ir edon rod unut hadoma pede emeknekama kakam larlara-anin tentieni mak edon katuru onde nor hoptutu-udia hoplera mak edon kodi wo'oni pede hota rwuh dioin la nor wutga onni-ga'arni .
wild waves of the sea , foaming out their own shame , wandering stars , for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever . ||| Ira rla ' a-rmai niohora ira nhiolli-lietni mak kamola-kama ' pa emolmolla yo'or meti nhia ' lawna pa ownu loi-pal lia . Ir rhoitio'or doin oleka hya ' maka kaplola , emeknekama wtiona maka ktuini la ' a genni-tienni . Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targa oleka ir geni la mel'uta-maliena pa nodi liarni .
About these also Enoch , the seventh from Adam , prophesied , saying , Behold , the Lord came with ten thousands of his holy ones , ||| Henok de , Adam duratni-waitni wo'itnu de enwohor targ olek hare wa la ' a nur wuowohorni niwra , Mimkek la , hota Itmatromlawanni Nmai die nora hopopanni-lili'irnu malaikat riwnu-riwnu mak kakleha do ' a-hala .
to execute judgment on all , and to convict all the ungodly of all their works of ungodliness which they have done in an ungodly way , and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him . ||| Ha rmai die totpena Orgahi-Orha ' a Ntoran watghudi la riy honona . Hota E ' ed maka kukmua riy dodo ' a-halala yoma nhioli-lieta mak edon kla ' nan Uplerlawna ralamni . Me E ' ed mak kukmua riy maka edon klernohora E ralma-riorni me rhoklira-rpah ' a waw la Uplerlawna pa ralernu-raha ' a .
These are murmurers and complainers , walking after their lusts-and their mouth speaks proud things-showing respect of persons to gain advantage . ||| Makwohorulu-ktatrulu maka mak edon kaplola ri raltier yata me rwaghala riy meheni . La ' hare mormiorni irlernohora neka nhiol yatyata mak ka'hira ralma-riorni . Ratulu-rapetna inon wamueheni , ne ranur mi'na totpa rlernana mak ha rwahaka .
But you , beloved , remember the words which have been spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ . ||| Mere ina-nara , mak kden rer lia a ralmu , Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Nhopan doinia riy mak kodi Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu re pa rtiy miy die . Mhioratreria hya ' maka ha rakota de hota ntutu-nte'ewa ,
They said to you , In the last time there will be mockers , walking after their own ungodly lusts . ||| de riwra , Hota la'pa noha nhi'pa niat wa dewade riy maka kapolu-kalielan la Uplerlawna lirni rma rrehgor wua . Rmai die rhorat to'ola yatyatni-halalli mak edonna kla ' nana Uplerlawna ralamni .
These are those who cause divisions and are sensual , not having the Spirit . ||| Ir irhatti mak kodia miy makpesiay lia to ' a-taiya . Ir edonna rlernana ruri-lai la Uplerlawna Nhiwni , mere eneknek to'ama rlernohora nohkerna wniaror yatyatni .
But you , beloved , keep building up yourselves on your most holy faith , praying in the Holy Spirit . ||| Mere ina-nara ama-hyali miy mak kden rer lia a ralmu , mpialiewan pa mlier la ga ' a la ' a miy pesiaymi la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak edon nhal eti . Hota mial inonmi totpa la'pa msiumbain de Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi miy .
Keep yourselves in God 's love , looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life . ||| Mdien rer lia Uplerlawna ralam kalwiedni pa mpiei reria mormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa nodi liarni mak hota Itmatromni Yesus Kristus Nala yoma ralam kalwiedni .
On some have compassion , making a distinction , ||| La'pa mliernana riy maka ralamni worworga la pesiayni , de msiaynia re pa mtiutga loi-talan la .
and some save , snatching them out of the fire with fear , hating even the clothing stained by the flesh . ||| Milewna riy mak katlin la tungkuru mak edon kaplola re pa emeka mhiedu riy de la ' a ai aratni . La'pa riy dom to ' mana mtiulla-msiayni mere mi'ererma totpena yana mhi ' do ' a-hala emekwalima ira , mere oliet miy la nhioli-lieta yatyatni-halalli re , pa emolmolan nekama nhi'inde miy sukmi tia'ala mtieman la naniairi maka rawoha-rwannia la kdeheni-ktiahlani .
Now to him who is able to keep them from stumbling , and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory in great joy , to God our Savior , who alone is wise , be glory and majesty , dominion and power , both now and forever . Amen . ||| Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu la tutullu-lolo'oni . E ' nanpena ed mak katiaka totpena yana mtiuini , ne E nanpena ed mak kod miy lia E gaini ralamni , de mikleha do ' a-hala kuku ' eti me mimdien rer lia ralma hepuepru . Hota mior wutga E ' la E genni la hititni-repreparni , homomarni-laliairni ralamni . E inhatte Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu maka kamori-kalewna ita , yoma ita talair nohor A'nani Yesus Kristus , Itmatromlawanni . Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi tlilili-tmamuau E ' a onnila E preheni-mkaini , rurni-laini , plolli-mneheni . Enmeh ' a ed mak kodi plola-ktaryatu la ' a noha gergera-tatiah ' i ma'ta , la ' pa dodo'ondi pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola . A kalwie'du , Yudasa
This is the Revelation of Jesus Christ , which God gave him to show to his servants the things which must happen soon , which he sent and made known by his angel to his servant , John , ||| La ' puk di de lirni e nwahaur nohora la ' a hya ' maka Yesus Kristus Nalharia Nakot nohora la mak khima-kre ' a E kniarni , la ' a hya ' maka Uplerlawna Netlia de hota kler pa kmai wia . Uplerlawna ed mak kalharia hare honona la A'nani Yesus Kristus ne Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a Yesus pa Nalharia hya ' mak hota kayamkeka ri la mak khima-kre ' a E kniarni . Noma Yesus Kristus Nhopan doinia hopopna mak kwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nma nakot nohor hare honona la a ' u , Yohansi mak khima-kre ' a E kniarni .
who testified to God 's word and of the testimony of Jesus Christ , about everything that he saw . ||| Noma Yohansi awuahaur momuoga hya ' maka alina-muat nana umkek nana re , de Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Nakot taru noma Yesus Kristus Nalharia .
Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy , and keep the things that are written in it , for the time is near . ||| Puk di , de makwohorulu-ktatrulu nabi lirni hadi , ne he ' mak kpaikia puka la nhiopun lawna me mak katlina puk di lirni pa rlernohor reria , de hota rler la unut lawna yoma hota edonna nalo'on wal pia hare honona maka rakot nohora la ' puk di de nwakrian wia .
John , to the seven assemblies that are in Asia , Grace to you and peace from God , who is and who was and who is to come , and from the seven Spirits who are before his throne , ||| Ina-nara ama-hyali mak kler temn olek la mutu krei mandiditu makden la Asia . A ' u Yohansi awuaka , de hota Uplerlawna Nala ra'ani-pallu me kalwiedni-paitiotni tiy miy . Uplerlawna ed mak kdena la ' a dodo'ondi , E ' nekpa ed makden olekwa , ne hota Nden pa nodi liarni . Me awuak pa mliernan walia ra'ani-pallu me kalwieda-paitiota la ' Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mak ha rhoiya la nhiw mandiditu mak kaprir lia Uplerlawna liwangenni gaini .
and from Jesus Christ , the faithful witness , the firstborn of the dead , and the ruler of the kings of the earth . To him who loves us , and washed us from our sins by his blood- ||| Me mliernan wal lia ' Yesus Kristus mak kdenrer miamaini setia pa Nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mak kaplola . E ' ed mak ha ramor ulga la matmiatni ralamni . Ne E ' wal pia mak kodi plolli la lodna-hairia noheri woru-lyanti nayanni . Yesus ed mak ktulla-ksayn ita pede Nala rarni na Ntuwu-nhai nian it pa Nwe'er doin it la do ' a-hala ralamni .
and he made us to be a Kingdom , priests to his God and Father-to him be the glory and the dominion forever and ever . Amen . ||| Ne Enwalir nian it pa tler la hairi ida maka Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a pa tla ' a imam-imam mak khima-kre ' a Uplerlawna , Yesus Amni de . La ' hade pede mai pia ta'uli-tawedi Wutmueha-Laimieha Yesus Kristus , makdella tulu-lyanti . La ' E ' nampena Nmeh ' a Nodi plolli pa nodi liarni . Amin Plola .
Behold , he is coming with the clouds , and every eye will see him , including those who pierced him . All the tribes of the earth will mourn over him . Even so , Amen . ||| Mhioratreria ! Hota Yesus Nmai die lol kakma ralamni . Riy nohkerna honona ramkek rer wiali E ' a , la'pa maka la ' ler ululu de kho'ora tera la ihranu matni me kliwra diwdiwra rohmera la lo'mani pa rwunu-rwenn E ' mana , hota rden wal pia rwatniar reria . Rimormioria nohkerna wawannu honona hota rapolu-ratniani , rko ' a-rkakru . Yah ! Plol toto ' pa hota emkade . Amin Plola .
I am the Alpha and the Omega , says the Lord God , who is and who was and who is to come , the Almighty . ||| Uplerlawna Orgahi-Orha ' a ed mak kdena la ' dodo'ondi , mak kden olekwa ne mak kden pa nodi liarni . E ' ed mak ktorna nohkerna tirni me , krautia lyanit marna ga'arni . E ' ed mak kharlirni pa Nakot emkadi , A ' g e ed mak ha rweta la Alpa nor Omega yoma A ' g ed mak kala ' ulu me A ' wal pia ed mak kden la li'iru .
I John , your brother and partner with you in the oppression , Kingdom , and perseverance in Christ Jesus , was on the isle that is called Patmos because of God 's Word and the testimony of Jesus Christ . ||| Inmi-narmi Yohansi a ' u , it hononita tler la liewr ida la ' a it pesiayni la Yesus Kristus pa reiniande tler la kropna-krieutu , lui-nuhru , mere tarur niekpa tatahan it ralamni . It rewre'wa pa tla ' riy mak Uplerlawna Nodi plolli la emeka Ray . Itler la hari honona yoma itler wutg olek la Yesus . Ina-nara , rolin targa a lia ' a noha Patmos yoma awuahaur nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Nakot taru , noma Yesus Nalharia mai a ' u .
I was in the Spirit on the Lord 's day , and I heard behind me a loud voice , like a trumpet ||| La'awa krei lerni , dewade Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nhu'ru ralm a ' u noma utlin nana lira ida nhaun de emolmolla noknoka ida pa e naltier lia a to'oru .
saying , What you see , write in a book and send to the seven assemblies , to Ephesus , Smyrna , Pergamum , Thyatira , Sardis , Philadelphia , and to Laodicea . ||| Lir de niwra , Mhuorat lolola hya ' ed maka mumkeka ne mu'enyatga la krei mandiditu la leta-leta ri , de Epsus , Smirna , Pergamus , Tiatira , Sardis , Filadelfia , me Laodikia .
I turned to see the voice that spoke with me . Having turned , I saw seven golden lamp stands . ||| Noma a'ukillia a to'oru pa utapnia he ' ed mak kaltier lia a ' diena . Noma umkek nana wa'du wniatatgenni wo'itu maka rhi ' nana la maha .
And among the lamp stands was one like a son of man , clothed with a robe reaching down to his feet , and with a golden sash around his chest . ||| La ' letgar la wa'du wniatatgenni re de , riy ida e Ntutrier lia de yamkekni emeknekama mak ha rweta la Rimormiori A'na . Naniayarni de raini plalahwa . La ' a ihranu de rala maha ra rwowa .
His head and his hair were white as white wool , like snow . His eyes were like a flame of fire . ||| Moratnu wahrani emekneka duma wullu ne matni lomarni-dainni emeka ai mormiori .
His feet were like burnished brass , as if it had been refined in a furnace . His voice was like the voice of many waters . ||| Lakni lipa-nka'ma pa emeka pi'ra maka ai ha na'an nana . Lirni emeka ger wawuau mak kayorni .
He had seven stars in his right hand . Out of his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword . His face was like the sun shining at its brightest . ||| Limni malganna Ntorreria wtiona wo'itu ne la ' a nurnu de nage'gota wehla ya'ara ida , naplokra la to'orni-gaini . Gaini reprepar momuou pa emeka lera hititni-repreparni la lera nwawuau ro'onni .
When I saw him , I fell at his feet like a dead man . He laid his right hand on me , saying , Do n't be afraid . I am the first and the last , ||| La'pa umkek tutga de upru'ru tar lia gaini ralamni de ukleh lira wawa . Mere Nlapra limni malganan la a wawnu pa Niwra , Yan mumta'ata . Mak kden ulu A ' u me mak kden li'iru A ' u .
and the Living one . I was dead , and behold , I am alive forever and ever . Amen . I have the keys of Death and of Hades . ||| Mak kmormiori pia nodi liarni . Amuati olekwa , mere oh ! Dodo'ondi Amuor pia nodi liarni . A ' g e ed mak kodi plolli la matmiati ne god plolli la noh mati-rai miolu pa A'umori owa'ana riy mak kmati olekwa re pa emolmolan nekama riy mak ktorna konsi , de nodi plolli pa nharia nhiari totpa riy rlergot la roma nhio'la .
Write therefore the things which you have seen , and the things which are , and the things which will happen hereafter . ||| La ' hade pede mhuorta momuoga hare honona maka mumkeka re , la ' a hya ' maka ha mumkeka ri , me mak hota mumkek owa'ana .
The mystery of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand , and the seven golden lamp stands is this , The seven stars are the angels of the seven assemblies . The seven lamp stands are seven assemblies . ||| Wtiona re wo'itu de nnia'eratni , de Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu la ' a krei wokni re wo'itu , ne wa'du wniatatgenni re wo'itu re , de nnia'eratni krei wokni wo'itu irhatta . Hade de nnia'eratni la ' wtion mandiditu mak omumkek oleka la A li'mu walli malganan de , ne la ' a wa'du wniatatgenni wo'itu mak ha rwewal nana la maha .
To the angel of the assembly in Ephesus write , He who holds the seven stars in his right hand , he who walks among the seven golden lamp stands says these things , ||| Noka Wutmueha-Laimieha Nakot mai a ' u Miwra , Lira mak hota mhuorta la ' a hopopna-lili'iru la ' a krei mutnu la ' leta Epsus , de lirni emkadilla , A ' g ed mak ktorna wtiona wo'itu la li'mu malganan de , ne Alioha-lilia pa Alina-muata kmeha-kmeh la wa'du wniatatgenni maka rwewal nana la ' maha re pa giwra ,
I know your works , and your toil and perseverance , and that you ca n't tolerate evil men , and have tested those who call themselves apostles , and they are not , and found them false . ||| Agat niohora ilmi-wniehwami , de mial ralam tetema pa mhima-mrie ' a Uplerlawna kniarni , ne la kropna-krieutu , lui-nuhru ralamni de miy e mitahan ralammi . Agat niohora walia de miy edonna mhiur niohora riy yatyata-halala . Ne riy mak kran inonni de emekwalimde makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu mere edon raplola , miwerta-mitaili olek ir pa mliernan ir de riy maka ka'ohpa-kalahara .
You have perseverance and have endured for my name 's sake , and have not grown weary . ||| Agat niohora de riy rnahora-rnala ' miy emkade ho'mana mtiahan nek ralammi pa edon mpiadur la mhima-mrie ' a A knia'ru onnila mpiesiay mai A ' u .
But I have this against you , that you left your first love . ||| Mere A lira pniolliohoru tiy miy . Yoma la ' lera-mela ri , de miy edon mtiutga ralam kalwiedwedmi pa emek ululu .
Remember therefore from where you have fallen , and repent and do the first works , or else I am coming to you swiftly , and will move your lamp stand out of its place , unless you repent . ||| La ' hade pede mpiahniorat la ' temmi me mpiaror nohor owa'an ralam kalwiedmi la ' ler ulul die . Mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin la nhiolmi-lietmi dodo'ondi mak kod miy lia do ' a-hala , ne mipali owa'ana nhioli-liet ululmi . La'pa edonan de hota a ' g ed mak kmai pia kwuh dioinia wa'du wniatatgenmi de la ' genni-tienni .
But this you have , that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans , which I also hate . ||| Mere twaror owa'ana , de miy kalwiedmi oke ' etla , yoma , miy sukmi atia ' a wniatutnu maka riy mak klernohora Nikolaus ha rwatutu . Wniatutnu de edon naplola , pede A ' muana ralmu edon nla ' nana .
He who has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies . To him who overcomes I will give to eat from the tree of life , which is in the Paradise of my God . ||| La'pa he ' ed mak katlin olek hari , de mhioratreria hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nwakdie'eta la krei wokni-le'enu honona re . La ' hameni ed maka ka'untu la do ' a-hala ralamni de , de hota Awuayow nohora pa nre'ela na'ana auwo ' a mak kodia mormiori-dardiari mak kmor lia Uplerlawna nhyi'ini maka rweta la Firdaus de .
To the angel of the assembly in Smyrna write , The first and the last , who was dead , and has come to life says these things , ||| Noka Wutmueha-Laimieha Nakot owa'an mai a ' u Niwra , Lira mak hota omhuorta la hopopna-lili'iru la ' a krei mutnu la ' leta Smirna , de emkadilla , A ' g ed Mak kden ulu me Mak ktawli'iru , Mak kmati olekwa mere kmori owa'ana giwra ,
I know your works , oppression , and your poverty but you are rich , and the blasphemy of those who say they are Jews , and they are not , but are a synagogue of Satan . ||| Agat niohora klehemi-larmi nora polpuolmi-wakwakmi yoma riy rnahora-rnala ' miy . Agat niohor miy klehemi-larmi mere la ' a plollolli de la ' a Uplerlawna yamkekni de mlier olek la pripanni-fa'anni . A'utlin oleka yapupu-yaheri maka rotil targa tiy miy . Nhi'inde iriwra ir de de Uplerlawna mutnu inhatta ira . Mere plollolli de ir nanpena Uplerlawna mutnu atia ' a pa rler teman la hegana amlawanni Setan wokni-le'enu .
Do n't be afraid of the things which you are about to suffer . Behold , the devil is about to throw some of you into prison , that you may be tested , and you will have oppression for ten days . Be faithful to death , and I will give you the crown of life . ||| Yan mimta'at la nniahora-nniala ' a mak hota edon nalo'on wali ne mliernana . Erammi la ' temmi ! Hota hegana amlawanni nareiniande rwi'it targa miy dom la ' a roma nhio'la ralamni . La ' talan emkade pede rawerta-ratailia miy pesiaymi . Hota mi'uhi-miklel nohora kropna-krieutu la lera-mela termida , pa emeka hya ' maka Uplerlawna Neti oleka . Yan memmemna mhiur dioinia A lia ralma-riormi nodia pa mmiati , kennama riwra rwunu-rwenan miy . Yoma hota emolmolan nekama mak ka'untu la mak kawlari , de hota rala siewa id la , de hota A ' g ed mak kala mori-lewna tiy miy pa Agala wuahla prehenmi-maumi .
He who has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies . He who overcomes wo n't be harmed by the second death . ||| La'pa he ' ed mak katlin olek hari , de mhioratreria hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nwakdie'eta la krei wokni-le'enu honona re . Hameni ed mak ka'untu de hota naplin niohor oleka matmiati re'eni wornu .
To the angel of the assembly in Pergamum write , He who has the sharp two-edged sword says these things , ||| Noka Wutmueha-Laimieha Nakot owa'an mai a ' u Niwra , Lir mak hota omhuorta la hopopna-lili'iru la ' a krei mutnu la leta Pergamus de lirni emkadilla , A ' g ed mak ktorna wehla ara mak kamnarat la to'orni-gaini . A nnio ' u emkadi ,
I know your works and where you dwell , where Satan 's throne is . You hold firmly to my name , and did n't deny my faith in the days of Antipas my witness , my faithful one , who was killed among you , where Satan dwells . ||| Agat niohora miy genmi-tienmi la gen miaka riy dodo ' a-halala ha rden la pede emeknekama mdiella gen miaka ha rwau tiarga hegana amlawanni liwangenni-mtatangenni yoma hegana nodi plolli la ' hande . Mere miy edon mliernohora hare mere mdien rer lia A ' u . Ne la ' ler maka ha ratuinia Antipas mak kdenrer pia nod nian A ' die aranni la miy letmi de , miy miana edonna mrieher doini wali A ' u .
But I have a few things against you , because you have there some who hold the teaching of Balaam , who taught Balak to throw a stumbling block before the children of Israel , to eat things sacrificed to idols , and to commit sexual immorality . ||| Mere ena'ida-nawor mueman la mak kamehra a ralmu , yoma la ' riy dom tiy miy die e rlernohora Bileam wniatutnu-wniaye'eni . Yoma Bileam ed maka kwatutga riy ida mak kwawa Balak totpa nhi ' adwiorin targa hairi Israel re pa rtuin la do ' a-hala ralamni . De de noria pa ra'ana ya'ana-yemun maka rala ra rhoi-rtania uplera-upmatni me nna'ohma la yalira-yaliai .
So also you likewise have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans . ||| La ' emkade wal lia riy dom tiy miy die e rlernohora wniatutu-wniaye ' a mak edon kaplola maka Nikolaus limni-rorni ha rwatutu .
Repent therefore , or else I am coming to you quickly and I will make war against them with the sword of my mouth . ||| Dodo'ondi A'ukot tiy miy totpa mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei lia do'omi-halmi re . La'pa edonan de , edon nalo'on wali pia hota Aghapartikil nohora miy lia genmi , pa Agala wehla ara , maka A'ukloman rer die pa gatipna-ghewra miy mak edon mhioitio'ora-mtiahnei dioinia do'omi-halmi re .
He who has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies . To him who overcomes , to him I will give of the hidden manna , and I will give him a white stone , and on the stone a new name written which no one knows but he who receives it . ||| La'pa he ' ed mak katlin olek hari , de mhioratreria hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nwakdie'eta la krei wokni-le'enu honona re . Riy mak ka'untu , de hota A ' g ed mak kal ir pa ra'ana manna mak kayade ' a , ne hota Agal walia wat wawahra nenenna la ' ir honona . La ' a wat die e rhorat targa nan warwuaru ida , maka riy id mana hota napling et miemna nan de . Nte ' nan toto ' a mak klernan wat die nanpena nmeh ' a natga , nan de .
To the angel of the assembly in Thyatira write , The Son of God , who has his eyes like a flame of fire , and his feet are like burnished brass , says these things , ||| Noka Wutmueha-Laimieha Nakot owa'an mai a ' u Niwra , Lira mak hota omhuorta la hopopna-lili'iru la ' a krei mutnu la ' leta Tiatira de emkadilla , A ' di de Uplerlawna A'nani , Wutmueha-Laimieha . A ma'tu hitita-reprepra pa emekneka ai , me A la'ku nmatliairi-nmatliairi pa emekneka pi'ra maka ai ha na'ana . A nnio ' u emkadi ,
I know your works , your love , faith , service , patient endurance , and that your last works are more than the first . ||| Agat niohora hya ' maka ha mhi ' a honona re . Agat niohora la miy die , miatu mtiulla-msiayni rimormiori wialmi . Mdien rer miamain la miy pesiaymi mai A ' u . Mhi ' arur miatmata la ' A knia'ru , ne miatu miod niohora lui-nuhru , polpuol ina-wakwak ama . Agat niohora la miy die de , mipe'el la A knia'ru , pede nod miy lia ga ' a , ne nareh mieman la ululu .
But I have this against you , that you tolerate your woman Jezebel , who calls herself a prophetess . She teaches and seduces my servants to commit sexual immorality and to eat things sacrificed to idols . ||| Mere A ralmu werta tiy miy yoma mhiur niohora Isabel mak kiwra e ' de makwohorulu-ktatrulu nabi id e ' a . Enwatutga A li'mu-ro'ru pa ralira-raliai , me nodi wialia pa ra'ana-remnia hya ' maka rhoi-rtania la uplera-upmati .
I gave her time to repent , but she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality . ||| A'ukot olek la e ' pa totpena plet pa nhoitio'or doin do'oni-halli re . Mere ralamni edonna nwayow pa nollia nhioli la yalira-yaliai me nhioini-tnianni la uplera-upmati .
Behold , I will throw her and those who commit adultery with her into a bed of great oppression , unless they repent of her works . ||| Mhioratreria ! Hota A ' g ed mak klakdiwra e la ' a lewnu wawannu pa herieri-walwialia pede edon nanin matni . Hota la ' eda de , pa mak ha nora ralira-raliai wiutu re , honona rewre'wa pa rler la nnien miak werta . La'pa ir edon rolli nhioli maka patke ' de nwatutga , de hare honona de hota Aghapartikil nohora A li'ru .
I will kill her children with Death , and all the assemblies will know that I am he who searches the minds and hearts . I will give to each one of you according to your deeds . ||| Mak klernohora e ' pa emeka riy ida nlernohora inni-amni , de hota Ariahmi wenwenna , totpena krei mutnu honona re rwera matni pa ratga de A ' di de ed maka kat niohora rimormiori ihranu ralamni . Ne Awuahla doin memna riy nenenna hihi'ini-yapyapni .
But to you I say , to the rest who are in Thyatira-as many as do n't have this teaching , who do n't know what some call ‘ the deep things of Satan'-to you I say , I am not putting any other burden on you . ||| Wniatutu-wniaye ' yatyata maka riy rwatutu ed mak ha rakal nana pa rwet la de , hegana amlawanni Setan lira-yatga mak rawunmua . Mere makden Tiatira miy dom de edonna mliernohora wniatutu-wniaye ' yatyat de , pede A'ukot tiy miy , hota A ' g edonna u'itra-ulawna kwara maka etla miy wawayanmi .
Nevertheless , hold that which you have firmly until I come . ||| Mere la ' dodo'ondi de la'pa ntut mueman la ler maka hota Amuai die , mtiorrer pitpitga la ' pesiaymi me mliernohor reria A li'ru-tu'nu .
He who overcomes , and he who keeps my works to the end , to him I will give authority over the nations . He will rule them with a rod of iron , shattering them like clay pots , as I also have received of my Father , ||| La'pa mak ka'untu , maka la'pa rodi liarni la ' a rhi ' a-ryapia hya ' maka A ralmu nala , de hota Agala rpa rlernana plola-mneha emekwalia hya ' maka Aliernana la A'mu . Hota Agal walia ir pa rlernana plola-mneha la hairi-hairi mak kmalawan la Uplerlawna , de rnairia lie'ena mnotna . Ne hota rnairia lie'en de pa ra rweyata hairi-hairi re , de emolmolla ran tan miaka ha rliwar wawah ' a .
and I will give him the morning star . ||| Hota Agal walia wtion mak kreprepar la tipru la ' riy mak ka'unut nana re .
He who has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies . ||| La'pa he ' ed mak katlin olek hari , de mhioratreria hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nwakdie'eta la krei wokni-le'enu honona re .
And to the angel of the assembly in Sardis write , He who has the seven Spirits of God and the seven stars says these things , I know your works , that you have a reputation of being alive , but you are dead . ||| Noka Wutmueha-Laimieha Nakot owa'ana mai a ' u Niwra , Lir maka omhuorta la hopopna-lili'iru la ' a krei mutnu la ' leta Sardis , de lirni emkadille , A ' g ed mak ktorna Uplerlawna nhiw mandiditnu , me wtiona mandiditu , A nnio ' u emkadi , Agat niohora hya ' maka mhi ' oleka wa . Riwra miy e mmiormiori . Mere miy de e mmiati olekwa .
Wake up and strengthen the things that remain , which you were about to throw away , for I have found no works of yours perfected before my God . ||| La ' hade pede mimata , nhioratmi la ' temmi ! Yan mimatia ralma-riormi makden ma'ta la temmi . Mere mhi ' aruri miy pesiaymi . Yoma aliernana la hya ' ed maka ha mhi ' a re , de id mana edon naplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni .
Remember therefore how you have received and heard . Keep it and repent . If therefore you wo n't watch , I will come as a thief , and you wo n't know what hour I will come upon you . ||| Hade pede mhioratreri owa'ana hya ' maka rwatutg oleka tiy miy wia la ulul geni . Ne la ' walia la ' a hya ' maka mitlin oleka wa . Mliernohor rer maka A'ukota re , me mhioitio'or doinia do'omi-halmi re . La'pa edonna mpiahniorat de , de hota Amuai die emeka mak kamnelu-kamna ' a pa hota miplin niohora Amuai lia hya ' lera .
Nevertheless you have a few names in Sardis that did n't defile their garments . They will walk with me in white , for they are worthy . ||| Mere la ' a miy mutmi makden la Sardis , de korni e ratiak ma'ta ihranu ralamni pa rmou-rwitna , pa emeknekama riy ida natiaka naniayarni totpena yana rakdieha-raktiahli . Hota ir er mak kor A ' pua mnairia naniair wawahra pa mala ' wutu . Yoma ir nanpena er mak Uplerlawna Ntutga pa rlernan hade yoma edonna rpa'eini-rpahal la Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
He who overcomes will be arrayed in white garments , and I will in no way blot his name out of the book of life , and I will confess his name before my Father , and before his angels . ||| La'pa he ' to ' wal pia ed mak ka'untu de hota ir rre ' teman la riy maka rohoga raini wawahra la inonni . Ir nanni de hota A ' g edonna kwun dioinia kuh dioin la puk maka ha rhorat targa riy mak kler la mormiori-dardiari pa nodi liarni re nanni . Ne hota la ' A'mu nor hopopanni-lili'irnu gaini ralamni , de A'ukot nohora giwra A'uaw nian olek ir wa .
He who has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies . ||| La'pa he ' mak katlin olek hari , de mhioratreria hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nwakdie'eta la krei wokni-le'enu honona re .
To the angel of the assembly in Philadelphia write , He who is holy , he who is true , he who has the key of David , he who opens and no one can shut , and who shuts and no one opens , says these things , ||| Noma Wutmueha-Laimieha Nakot owa'an mai a ' u Niwra , Maka omhuorta la hopopna-lili'iru la ' a krei mutnu la leta Filadelfia lirni de emkadille , A ' di de riy mak kden la mou-witna , ploi-ple'era . Ne A ' di , ihini-iparni A ' inhatta . A ' g ed mak ktorna konis ripu mak Daud gahani . La'pa Aghari nhiari de , riy id mana ta'en niana nho'la . Ne la'pa Agho'la nhiari , de riy id mana ta'en niana nharia . A nnio ' u emkadi ,
I know your works behold , I have set before you an open door , which no one can shut , that you have a little power , and kept my word , and did n't deny my name . ||| Agat niohora hihi'imi-yapyapmi . Agat niohora miy rurmi-laimi edonna la ntutu-nte ' a yoma riy ida-woru rmeh ' a miy . Mere miy e mliernohor olek A wua la A wniatu'tu-wniaye ' u . Me mdien rer miamain mai A ' u . Mhioratreria ! Aghar tiarg oleka nhiari id tiy miy wia . Ne la'pa riy id mana hota edonna nho'la nhiar die tiy miy .
Behold , I make some of the synagogue of Satan , of those who say they are Jews , and they are not , but lie-behold , I will make them to come and worship before your feet , and to know that I have loved you . ||| Mhioratrer hadi ! Riy mak kla oleka hegana mutnu , mak ka'ohpa-kalahar pa riwra ir de nanpena Uplerlawna mutnu maka ha wnialir tiaru , A'ukot targa de hota Aghi ' a pa rmai pia rru ' u-rtowar la miy lakmi nayanni . Ne totpa rwayow nohora de miy nanpena er mak A ralmu napal niana .
Because you kept my command to endure , I also will keep you from the hour of testing which is to come on the whole world , to test those who dwell on the earth . ||| Mliernohor oleka A li'ru mak A'ukot nohora la ' a yatahan ralma la kropna-krieutu ralamni . La ' hade pede A ' muana hota ghilpai-muanatu miy lia ' noha riokatni la tipru-warta , me ray rilla ra ' i-tranna . Hota ral kropna-krieutu matmiat liawan de pa ra rta'ga rimormioria nohkerna wawannu .
I am coming quickly ! Hold firmly that which you have , so that no one takes your crown . ||| Hota Alier pa muai wia . Mitiak rer kalwiedweda hya ' maka miy hanmi , totpena yana riy id mana na'ala hya ' maka ha mi'unut nana .
He who overcomes , I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God , and he will go out from there no more . I will write on him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God , the new Jerusalem , which comes down out of heaven from my God , and my own new name . ||| Riy mak ka'untu , de hota Aghi ' a pa nden nek la ' A Uplerlawnu romni ralamni pa nodi liarni pa emeka riri tniutu mak ta'en niana riy rawo'la nana , makdella rom de ralamni . Ne hota riy de nden nek la Uplerlawna lodna lie'enu-hairi liowni pa naterna apitga . Hota Aghonin targa la inonni , de Uplerlawna mak A ' u'uli-uwedia nanni me Yerusalem warwuaru nanni totpa rat niohora de Uplerlawna gahani e ' a me Yerusalem warwuaru de e let wamueheni . Yerusalem de , hota nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa Nernu , de Uplerlawna ed mak kal hade . Ne hota Aghorat walia A nan warwua'ru la inonni yoma A gah ' u e ' a .
He who has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies . ||| He ' ed mak katlin olek hari , de mhioratreria hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nwakdie'eta la krei wokni-le'enu honona .
To the angel of the assembly in Laodicea write , The Amen , the Faithful and True Witness , the Beginning of God 's creation , says these things , ||| Noka Wutmueha-Laimieha Nakot owa'an mai a ' u Niwra , Lira mak hota omhuorta la ' a hopopna-lili'iru la ' a krei mutnu la ' leta Laodikia de emkadilla lirni , A ' di de mak ha riwra Amin , Makden la Plol wawna , A ' g ed mak kdenrer setia pa A'ukot nohora Uplerlawna gahani honona totpena riy rat niohora ha raplola , me Uplerlawna Nor A ' pua Makoki-mayapi nohkerna nora lyanti . A nnio ' u emkadi ,
I know your works , that you are neither cold nor hot . I wish you were cold or hot . ||| Agat niohora hihi'imi-yapyapmi re . Agat niohora de miy edon mrieher A ' u mere miy wal pia edon mtiorrer pitpit lia miy pesiaymi la ' A ' u pede miy die emolmolan neka gera mak edonna nwoki mere edonna npahna wali . Agiwra totpa miy mpioki onde mpiahna .
So , because you are lukewarm , and neither hot nor cold , I will vomit you out of my mouth . ||| Mere miy edon mrieher A ' u me miy wal pia edonna mtiorrer pitpit lia miy pesiaymi la ' A ' u pa miy die emeka gera mak mamamtu . La ' hade pede hota A'umot doin miy lia A wa'wu .
Because you say , ‘ I am rich , and have gotten riches , and have need of nothing , ' and do n't know that you are the wretched one , miserable , poor , blind , and naked , ||| Mikota miwra miy e mrie ' a-mtiaru , pede hare honona mliernan oleka , mere miy e miplin niohor miy e mikleha-miplar nande mikleha hewewta-naniairi pa mitliawihi , ne matmi ryata .
I counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire , that you may become rich , and white garments , that you may clothe yourself , and that the shame of your nakedness may not be revealed , and eye salve to anoint your eyes , that you may see . ||| La ' hade pede A'uno ' miy totpena miwelia A mah ' u , yoma A mah ' u de maha ihini , totpena mtiaru . Miweli wialia naniair wawahra la mai A ' u totpena mniairia , de ma mihewua miy inonmi mak kamola-kama ' miy die . Ne miwel wialia wu'ru-atiawi totpena ma mpianapal matmi totpena mimkeka .
As many as I love , I reprove and chasten . Be zealous therefore , and repent . ||| Riy mak Asiaynia re ir er maka nhi'inde Apuol niohora me Awuale'era mak khala . La ' hade pede inonmi re rapepe'ela , ne mhioitio'or doin-mtiahnei dioin do'omi-halmi .
Behold , I stand at the door and knock . If anyone hears my voice and opens the door , then I will come in to him and will dine with him , and he with me . ||| Mitlina ! A ' g ed mak kaprir lia nhiari gaini pa tiet la nhiari . He ' natlin nana A li'ru , dewade nhari nhiari , de hota A lia ' rialam pa Awuatroma me Agor rewre'wa ma'an wutu .
He who overcomes , I will give to him to sit down with me on my throne , as I also overcame and sat down with my Father on his throne . ||| He ' ed mak ka'untu de Aghopan pa namtatan wut muai A ' u lia A mtatange'nu pa emekwalia A ' u'untu olekwa pa Agora A'mu mamtatan wut lia mtatangenni .
He who has an ear , let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies . ||| La'pa he ' ed mak katlin olek hari , de mhioratreria hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Nwakdie'eta la krei wokni-le'enu honona re .
After these things I looked and saw a door opened in heaven , and the first voice that I heard , like a trumpet speaking with me , was one saying , Come up here , and I will show you the things which must happen after this . ||| Nhorwua noma Yohansi a ' u adiarat nan id owa'an to ' a . De a'umkek la Ilyamou-Watyatoha Sorga de nhiari ida nahniari . Nhor nioma a'utlin owa'ana lira mak utlin oleka la ' a lir maka a'utlin de emekneka noknoka lirni . Lir de nakot mai a ' u , Mai pia mhua'at la handi pa Atiutga hya ' maka hota kler pa kmai .
Immediately I was in the Spirit . Behold , there was a throne set in heaven , and one sitting on the throne ||| La'pa mtatan de nekpa Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli mai a ' pua umkek la Ilyamou-Watyatoha de Riy ida e Namtatna la mtatangenni ida .
that looked like a jasper stone and a sardius . There was a rainbow around the throne , like an emerald to look at . ||| Riy de Nhita-nrepra liplipa-kamka'ma ne lipni emekwali watu motmota mak kwawa Yaspis me watu mermera mak kwawa delima . Ne ohni ida horni emek watu motmota mak liplipa-kamka'ma pa nle ' niana liwangeni-mtatangen die .
Around the throne were twenty-four thrones . On the thrones were twenty-four elders sitting , dressed in white garments , with crowns of gold on their heads . ||| La ' liwangen die lie'enu ralamni de mtatangen tiutulu terampworu wehrani wogata e rle ' reria . La ' hare de o'ta-mata riy terampworu wehrani wogata e raliwan targa la mtatangeni re , de honona rnairia wawahrani . Ne rawutu-ralaiya wutu-lai miaha .
Out of the throne proceed lightnings , sounds , and thunders . There were seven lamps of fire burning before his throne , which are the seven Spirits of God . ||| La ' a liwangen tiutul die hitita-repreparni rpira-ra'pa emek hita-tlena , me kukru-gauru yetni warna . Me la ' a liwangen tiutul die gaini , de hulga mormiori wo'itga e rawniau . Hare de nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli maka riwra Uplerlawna nhiwni mandiditnu .
Before the throne was something like a sea of glass , similar to crystal . In the middle of the throne , and around the throne were four living creatures full of eyes before and behind . ||| La ' liwangen tiutul die gaini wali , de hadom yamkekni emolmolla hletan lawan mak kamememi ne nheik nohora la watgai liplipa kristal . La ' liwangeni die walli-walli de hamormiori wogata e rhapet reria . Ne la to'orni-gaini de rpenpuen lia matni .
The first creature was like a lion , the second creature like a calf , the third creature had a face like a man , and the fourth was like a flying eagle . ||| Hamormiori re ida , de gaini emekneka ohdawra yoma emolmolan neka singa mak kodi plola-ktaryat lia hamormiori dom to ' a . Hamormiori wornu de , gaini emekneka hayori muanu yoma hamormiori die naruri-nalai , hamormiori wotellu de , gaini emekneka rimormiori herni-gaini yoma emolmolan neka rimormiori pede wniarorni plalahwa . Hamormiori wogatni de , gaini na'erit nohora emekneka iha rajawali mak knema-ktai yoma nnem de meranni pa nla'aw la meni-meni to ' a .
The four living creatures , each one of them having six wings , are full of eyes around and within . They have no rest day and night , saying , Holy , holy , holy is the Lord God , the Almighty , who was and who is and who is to come ! ||| Hamormiori re wogata , la ' nenenan de , rnairi liwarni wonema . La ' inonni re honona me la ' walia liwarni re walli-walli rpenpuen lia matni . La ' lelera-melmel de hamormiori re edonna rher rer lia wniatunu-wniahniara pa riwra , Lilili-mamuau lia ' O genmu-tienmu Orgahi O ' a , Uplerlawna O ' a , lilili-mamuau lia tutulmu-lolo'omu . Yoma O ' ed mak kodi plolli la haneka-harahu wuawannu . Mak kmou-kwitna inhat O ' a . Maka ploloi-plele'er O ' a . Omdiena , Omdien olek la me Omdien nek la pa nodi liarni .
When the living creatures give glory , honor , and thanks to him who sits on the throne , to him who lives forever and ever , ||| Emkade pede hamormiori re wogata rwahniara nhiar ya'uli-yawedi nhiu'ru-nhielma la ' a E ' makden la liwangen tiutul die pa nodi liarni . Ne la'pa hamormiori re rwahniara , de
the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne and worship him who lives forever and ever , and throw their crowns before the throne , saying , ||| o'ta-mata riy terampworu wehrani wogata re , rwaltior tar lia Uplerlawna mak kamtatan la liwangen die gaini ralamni . E ' ed mak kodi plolli pa nodi liarni . Nhor nioma honona rnaklia wutnu-laini re la ' a liwangen tiutul die gaini pa rakot la ,
Worthy are you , our Lord and God , the Holy One , to receive the glory , the honor , and the power , for you created all things , and because of your desire they existed and were created ! ||| Ee Matroma O ' a , de a Uplerlawan mamni O ' ee ! O ' nanpena ed maka ma'uli-mawedi mhu'ru-mhelma la ' a tutulmu-lolo'omu onnila O plolmu-mnehemu , yoma O ' ed mak kokoma-kpapala , kakoki-kayap niana haneka-harahu wuawannu ri . Me O ralma-rior wamuehemu wal piede reinian haneka-harahu wuawannu ri , rler la mormiori .
I saw , in the right hand of him who sat on the throne , a book written inside and outside , sealed shut with seven seals . ||| La'awa honi de a'umkek nana la Uplerlawna mak kamtatan la gen tiutul die limni malganna ralamni , de Entorreria puka pniopna ida . Ne la ' puk de ralamni de npenpuen niohora nhiorta lie ' u la walli-walli ne e rala hiwliai cap wo'itu ra rtapal targa la .
I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice , Who is worthy to open the book , and to break its seals ? ||| Noma umkek walia Uplerlawna hopopanni mak karuri-kalai ida npolu-nhaun pa niwra , He ' nodi plolli pa nhau diodioinia hiwliai maka ha ra rkulit targa puka pniopan dena de ?
No one in heaven above , or on the earth , or under the earth , was able to open the book or to look in it . ||| Mere riy ida la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , onde riy id la ' a nohkerna wawannu , onde mak kdella nohkerna wikni-la ray gerni mana edonna rparan pia nheik la puk de pa nharia me nkillia puk de ralamni .
Then I wept much , because no one was found worthy to open the book or to look in it . ||| La ' hade pede A'uhedge'du la kniakru yoma la riy id mana taken niana nharia puk de pa nkillia ralamni .
One of the elders said to me , Do n't weep . Behold , the Lion who is of the tribe of Judah , the Root of David , has overcome , he who opens the book and its seven seals . ||| Noma riy id la ' o'ta-mata re nhar lirni pa nakot mai a ' u , Oi ! Yana muhe'du la kniakru . Mkillia ! Yesus mak ha rwet la de Singa mak kwatiawu Yehuda luwnu-a'nani me mak ha rwet wal lia , Daud duratni-waitni inhatta , ed maka ka'unut lawn olekwa . La ' hade pede E ' nanpena hota ed mak kodi plolli pa khau dioinia hiwliai mak ha ra rkulit taru re wo'itu pa nkillia puk de ralamni .
I saw in the middle of the throne and of the four living creatures , and in the middle of the elders , a Lamb standing , as though it had been slain , having seven horns and seven eyes , which are the seven Spirits of God , sent out into all the earth . ||| Noma a'umkek walia Dum A'na ida Naprir lia liwangen tiutul die onni . Me hamormiori re wogata mana rora o'ta-mata re honona pa rle'lu reria . Tamkek la Dum A'na de , emekneka e rwunu-rwenn oleka wa . Dum A'na de dudallu wo'itu me matni mana wo'itu . Matni mandiditu re nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli maka ha rweta la nhiw mandiditu , maka Dum A'na Nhopan pa Nla ' nohkerna uhunu-ewatni .
Then he came , and he took it out of the right hand of him who sat on the throne . ||| La ' noma riy mak kamtatan la liwangen tiutul die , Nala puk maka pniopan de , mak Enantorreria la limni walli malganan della ' Dum A'na de .
Now when he had taken the book , the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb , each one having a harp , and golden bowls full of incense , which are the prayers of the saints . ||| La'pa Dum A'na de Nreinian puk de , dewade hamormiori re wogata me o'ta-mata terampworu wehrani wogata re honona rwaltiora-rwaltieman la gaini ralamni . Ir honona rewre'wa pa rtorreria hadom emeka gitara me lari miaha mak kpenpuen lia ayalli maka rtutnia . Ayalli de , nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re sniumbaini .
They sang a new song , saying , You are worthy to take the book and to open its seals , for you were killed , and bought us for God with your blood out of every tribe , language , people , and nation , ||| Honona re rwahniara nhiar warwuaru ida de riwra , O ' nanpena ed mak ka'ala puk de me O ' wal pia ed maka khar dioinia hiwliai miaka ha ra rkulit targa puka pniopan de . Yoma la ' O wnienanmu me rarmu mak kaktiowur doin la pa rimormioria nohkerna mak kwatiawua hairi-hairi nor wutga noh pa'etu-rai piatatra nor wut nieka leta-leta ror wutga wniareini-wniahaurnu re , Muweli momuog olek ir pa Muala la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu .
and made us kings and priests to our God , and we will reign on the earth . ||| O ' ed mak kwalir nian oleka ir pa rler la hair ida maka Mtiutmuata-mkiewra ' a pa rhi ' a o'ta-mata imam mak khima-kre ' a it Uplerlawanni , me Mual walia ir pa rodi plolli la nohkeran di wawannu .
I looked , and I heard something like a voice of many angels around the throne , the living creatures , and the elders . The number of them was ten thousands of ten thousands , and thousands of thousands , ||| Nhor nioma A'umkek owa'an , de utlin reria Uplerlawna hopopanni rhar lirni de riwnu-halli rmariohmu . Honona rpepan reria yaliwangen tiutul die nor wutga hamormiori re wogata me o'ta-mata re honona .
saying with a loud voice , Worthy is the Lamb who has been killed to receive the power , wealth , wisdom , strength , honor , glory , and blessing ! ||| Ne rarur mieman la wniahniara riwra , Dum A'na mak ha rwen olek de nampena ed maka ha tsu'ru-tselma , me ta'uli-tawedia la ' a tutullu-lolo'oni , la ' a re'eni-tniarnu , rurni-laini , kirkirni-ralma-riorni !
I heard every created thing which is in heaven , on the earth , under the earth , on the sea , and everything in them , saying , To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing , the honor , the glory , and the dominion , forever and ever ! Amen ! ||| Noma a'utlin walia mak kmormior lia Ilyamou-Watyatoha , mak kden nohkerna , ne mak kden la noha wikni-ray gerni . Rrekan neka la hya ' mak kdella lyanti nayanni , rwahniar momuou pa riwra , Mak kamtatan la liwangen tiutul die nor wut walia Dum A'na de , hare nanpena er maka ha ra'uli-rawedi , ha rhu'ru-rhelma pa nodi liarni me er maka kodi plolli la haneka-harahu wuawannu pa nodi liarni !
The four living creatures said , Amen ! Then the elders fell down and worshiped . ||| Noma hamormiori re wogata rwahla riwra , Amin Plola . Ne o'ta-mat no ' hande honona re rwaltiora-rwaltieman momuou lia tani wawannu .
I saw that the Lamb opened one of the seven seals , and I heard one of the four living creatures saying , as with a voice of thunder , Come and see ! ||| Nhorwua noma a'umkek nana Dum A'na de Nreye'era hiwliai mak kakniulti ida la kniulit taru re wo'itu . Noma a'utlina hamormiori id la hamormior wogata re nhar lirni , niwra , Mmuai ! Lirni prahkani emekneka kukru-gauru .
Then a white horse appeared , and he who sat on it had a bow . A crown was given to him , and he came out conquering , and to conquer . ||| Noma a'umkek la de kuda wawahra ida ! Ne mak kha ' kud de , ntoran reria ra'pa , ne ral walia wutu-lai maha id la e ' a . Ne nler pa nmai die emolmolla mak ka'unut la wunu-ara . Nmai nioka nla'awa la nohkerna wawannu totpa narehi la wunu-ara owa'ana .
When he opened the second seal , I heard the second living creature saying , Come ! ||| Nhor nioma Dum A'na de Nreye'er hiwliai mak kakniulti wornu . Noma a'utlin de hamormiori wornu de niwra , Mmuai !
Another came out , a red horse . To him who sat on it was given power to take peace from the earth , and that they should kill one another . There was given to him a great sword . ||| Noma kuda id owa'an pa nlergota . Kud de inonni mermer mutmutni . Ne mak kha ' kuda rala pa nodi plolli pa e ' ed maka ktiwrie'era nohkeran di kalwiedni-paitiotni , totpena rimormiori idma nwunu-nwen ida . Pede rala pa ntoran reria wehla ya'ara inpon lawna ida .
When he opened the third seal , I heard the third living creature saying , Come and see ! And behold , a black horse , and he who sat on it had a balance in his hand . ||| Noma Dum A'na de Nreye'era owa'ana hiwliai maka kniulti wotellu . Ne a'utlin de hamormiori la'pa wotellu niwra , Mmuai ! Noma a'umkek nana kud memetma ida , de riy ida e nha ' a nana . Mak kha ' de e nodia tatiaili ida totpena nawerta-nataili ya'ana-yemnu , yoma ya'ana-yemun de hota edon ntu'tu .
I heard a voice in the middle of the four living creatures saying , A choenix of wheat for a denarius , and three choenix of barley for a denarius ! Do n't damage the oil and the wine ! ||| Ne a'utlina hadom emeka rimormiori lirni nwatiawua hamormiori wogata re letgarni . Lir de niwra , Metma mak samomuou , de welli werat rehia , de weratni tatia ' u ralamni , de welli emekwalia kai la lera ida , ne metma mak kyata welli werat wali , yoma tatia ' u re'eni wotelu de welli emekwalia kai la lera ida . Mere yanpa mpieyata-mpianiaga saitun re rora anggur wo ' a lokrahi la ' a nhyi ' ralma . La ' saitun de rlernana wu'ru me la ' anggur wo ' a de anggur turnu .
When he opened the fourth seal , I heard the fourth living creature saying , Come and see ! ||| Noma Dum A'na de Nreye'era hiwliai mak kakniulti la puk de wogatni . Ne a'utlin de hamormiori mak wogatni de nhar lirni pa niwra , Mmuai !
And behold , a pale horse , and the name of he who sat on it was Death . Hades followed with him . Authority over one fourth of the earth , to kill with the sword , with famine , with death , and by the wild animals of the earth was given to him . ||| Noma a'umkek nana kuda ida de nmota-nma'ara . Riy mak kha ' nan de nwawa Maka'ala Riy Aranni Matmiati . La ' to'orni de Noha Mati-Rai Miolu e nlernohor reria . Rimormiori miakden la nohkeran di de rtaw dioinia id ralamni la ' a nhiakra ralamni re'eni wogat la seperempat , pa rala la Maka'ala Riy Aranni Matmiati me Noha Mati-Rai Miolu die totpena rala rwenna rimormiori re la ar ralma , la rehka-lara , la nnieni-nhiena , me la ' walia la'pa oha-ahu rlihir motmota-rhaw riarara .
When he opened the fifth seal , I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been killed for the Word of God , and for the testimony of the Lamb which they had . ||| Nhorwua noma Dum A'na de Nreye'era hiwliai mak kakniulit la puk de wolimni . Noma umkek de rimormiori do'oni-hmuakarnu erawioyoin la wat katri'ana nayanni . Rimormiori re er mak kler la wniunu-wnienna onnila rdenrer lia yakotnohorni la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu .
They cried with a loud voice , saying , How long , Master , the holy and true , until you judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth ? ||| Rpolu-rhaun pa riwra , E ! Matromlawnu ne ! Orgahi-Orha ' a O ' a . Mak kmou-kwitna , kaploi-kaple'era id O ' a , Makodi plolli la haneknek wawannu . Mmuormior lia lyanit lawna . Mupriri-mukded la genmu-tienmu pa Mlin reri-muat reri ami . Me yan Muolin limmu-mpue'er rormu onde Mpuer matmu la mai ami . Ne hota hya ' lera-hya ' wolan nanpena Mhudi-mpuara rimormiori nohkerna wawannu makwunu-makwen ami rina de ?
A long white robe was given to each of them . They were told that they should rest yet for a while , until their fellow servants and their brothers , who would also be killed even as they were , should complete their course . ||| Noma Uplerlawna Nala rain plalahwa wawahra pa rima-rima rnairia gahani . Ne Nhopan pa honona re rahe'he'elia hande pa rwewiei niohora mutwualli korni mak khima-kre ' a Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , mak hota riy yatyata re rwunu-rwenna pa emekwalia rwunu-rwenna olek ir wa . Yoma Uplerlawna Nror targa Nakot targa oleka de ha meni mak khima-kre ' a E ' a de mak hota riy yatyata re rwunu-rwenna .
I saw when he opened the sixth seal , and there was a great earthquake . The sun became black as sackcloth made of hair , and the whole moon became as blood . ||| Noma a'umkek walia Dum A'na de Nreye'era owa'ana hiwliai maka kakniulit la puka wonemni . Dewade noha nruru-rai nwo'la , tah ' i nwo'la-yo'ora napeha . Lera mana yamkekni nmati . Me wolla mana nmermera laliairia pa emeka rara .
The stars of the sky fell to the earth , like a fig tree dropping its unripe figs when it is shaken by a great wind . ||| Wtiona pala tuinia la noha wawannu de emekneka kar wo ' mak edonna kgawar ma'ta ha riurga yoma anin lawna nodia me'etni .
The sky was removed like a scroll when it is rolled up . Every mountain and island was moved out of its place . ||| Lyanti yamkekni emekneka kartasa pniopna pa nmol tietema ne wo'ora tutulu re ror wut nieka noha-noha re rmol lia genni-tienni .
The kings of the earth , the princes , the commanding officers , the rich , the strong , and every slave and free person , hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains . ||| La ' dewade mak khi ' ray lia nohkeran di wawannu , riy mak orgengeni , mak kodia ahu namni la ar ralma , makre ' a-maktaru , mak o'ta-mata lola etnu liolli , ne mak kla ' hya ' a-hya ' to'owa , mak kla ' ata-wa'ara , me marna-wuhura mana ema rkor niana pa rade ' a-ramoinia la hu'ula-ka'ara pa emekneka hunu-hliai makden la leri-watu rletni .
They told the mountains and the rocks , Fall on us , and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne , and from the wrath of the Lamb , ||| Rpolpuolu-rhawaunia la wo'ora-kawru me watu lawna pa riwra , Wo'ora-kawru , watu liawnu nee ! Mitlin mai ami , Mtiuin nan am lia handi pa mide ' am lia Hade mak kamtatan la liwangen tutul die , me la ' walia Dum A'na mak kahe ' yawenan de .
for the great day of his wrath has come , and who is able to stand ? ||| Ler matmiat liawna inhatti wa ! Dodo'ondi de Hare er mak ktowrernia yawenanni pa riy id mana edonna ntahan nan pa ntutrier la gaini ralamni .
After this , I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth , holding the four winds of the earth , so that no wind would blow on the earth , or on the sea , or on any tree . ||| Nhorwua noma a'umkek nana Uplerlawna hopopanni re wogata rhapet reria nohkeran di uhunu re wogata , ne rtorn apitga anni re matni wogata , totpena yana anni rten liola lora me ra ' a keranni pa yana ora-au rwo'la-rwaini .
I saw another angel ascend from the sunrise , having the seal of the living God . He cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to harm the earth and the sea , ||| Dewade a'umkek nana Uplerlawna hopopanni id owa'ana nmai die nwatiawu tipru , nmai die nodia Uplerlawna mak kden pa nodi liarni , hiwliaini kniau maka rtapla la reranni-kiorni . Uplerlawna hopopanni de nhaun wah ' a noha pa nakot la hopopan mandadata re mak kodi plolli pa rweyata-rwaniaga la lora me ra ' a .
saying , Do n't harm the earth , the sea , or the trees , until we have sealed the bondservants of our God on their foreheads ! ||| Hopopan de niwra , Yana mpieyata plein la lora me ra ' a keranni nor wutga ora-au re honona . Mpiei piena amtapla kniau la mak ktulla-kar lia Uplerlawna tulanni-kniarni re reranni-kiorni totpena yana rler wutga la wnieyata-wnianiawu !
I heard the number of those who were sealed , one hundred forty-four thousand , sealed out of every tribe of the children of Israel , ||| Noma a'utlin nan lirni niwra , Hota maka rtapla la reran kiorni , de riy riwnu rahu ida terampwogata wehrani wogata . La ' hare honona re , de ra ' nan harella la Israel Yakopa duratni-waitni riy termida wehrani woru re .
of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed , of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand , of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand , ||| La durti-waiti ida , de e ra ' nana riy riwnu termida wehrani woru , hota la ' a Yehuda , Ruben , Gad ,
of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand , of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand , of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand , ||| Asyera , Naftali , Manasye ,
of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand , of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand , of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand , ||| Simeona , Lewi , Isakar ,
of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand , of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand , and of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed . ||| Sebulon , Yusup , me Benyamina .
After these things I looked , and behold , a great multitude which no man could count , out of every nation and of all tribes , peoples , and languages , standing before the throne and before the Lamb , dressed in white robes , with palm branches in their hands . ||| La hadewa de a'umkek nan owa'ana rimormiori emekneka en liu'wu-tan miakmu , la'pa riy id mana edon nat niohora riy wo'ira rimormiori mutlialawna re . Hare e rwatiawua nohkeran di hairni-hairni honona , la'pa noh pa'etu-rai piatatra nora leta-leta ror wut nieka wniareini-wniahaurnu . Rimormiori re honona de ema rnanin nana la naniairi raini plalahwa wawahra . Ne honona re rtorreria koram tawi pa rtutrier lia liwangen tiutulu nor wutga Dum A'na de gaini ralamni pa rapal wiutu .
They cried with a loud voice , saying , Salvation be to our God , who sits on the throne , and to the Lamb ! ||| Rhaun wah ' a noha pa riwra , It mormiori-lewlewanni di , ha nwatiawua Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu it Orgahi-Orha'ani mak kamtatan la liwangen tiutul die hananni me la ' walia Dum A'na de .
All the angels were standing around the throne , the elders , and the four living creatures , and they fell on their faces before his throne , and worshiped God , ||| Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu honona rtutrier wutwut pua rpepan reria liwangen tiutul die ne o'ta-mata me hamormiori re wogata wali . Noma hare honona e rwaltiora-rwaltieman la liwangen tiutul die gaini pa ra'uli-rawedia Uplerlawna .
saying , Amen ! Blessing , glory , wisdom , thanksgiving , honor , power , and might , be to our God forever and ever ! Amen . ||| Honona re riwra , Amin Plola ! Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak ama'uli-mawedi mhu'ru-mhelma muh ' idma-mrama lia'ara , Omdien la liwangenmu-mtatangenmu , Mutulu-mupetna Mupriri-mukded la ' a genmu-tienmu . O ' nanpena plollolli me kirkirmu-ralma-riormu ed mak ama'uli-mawedi la ' a genmu-tienmu makden la tutullu-lolo'oni . O ' ed mak ktorna plolli-mneheni pa nodi liarni . O ' ed mak ama'uli-mawedi mhu'ru-mhelma pa nodi liarni . Amin .
One of the elders answered , saying to me , These who are arrayed in the white robes , who are they , and where did they come from ? ||| La ' a o'ta-mata re honona , de ida nmai pia natian a ' u niwra , Riy mak knairia naniairia plalahwa wawahra ri ir he ' a , me ha rwatiawu hanmeni ?
I told him , My lord , you know . He said to me , These are those who came out of the great suffering . They washed their robes and made them white in the Lamb 's blood . ||| Noma awuahla la lirni , A'uplinga tuna . Tuna nmeh ' a nanpena natga hare . Noma nakot mai a ' u niwra , Hari er mak kler la kropna-krieutu matmiat liawan de . Ral oleka Dum A'na rarni pa ra rpah'ia hare naniayarni pa nwal lia wowo ' a-wawahrani .
Therefore they are before the throne of God , and they serve him day and night in his temple . He who sits on the throne will spread his tabernacle over them . ||| La ' hade pede Irtutrier lia Uplerlawna liwangen tiutul die gaini . Ne rhima-rre ' a me rkola tieru-rawur nehla la E ' a la ' lelera-melmela la Uplerlawna romni nayanni . Ne ed Mak kamtatan la liwangen tiutul die , hota Nden wut lia ira totpena Ntera-ndema .
They will never be hungry or thirsty any more . The sun wo n't beat on them , nor any heat , ||| Hota la ' yaplara me tier kerna mana ir edonna ra'eram nana . Ler pahna lawna mana hota edonna nhit nana re .
for the Lamb who is in the middle of the throne shepherds them and leads them to springs of life-giving waters . And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes . ||| Yoma Dum A'na makden la liwangen tiutul die onni , hota ed mak klernohor rer ira . Hota E ' ed mak kodia ir la ger ormat mak kodia mormiori-laliahu . Ne Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu ed mak knah dioinia lui-nuhru mak kden la ir matni .
When he opened the seventh seal , there was silence in heaven for about half an hour . ||| La'pa Dum A'na de Nreye'era hiwliai mak ha rkulti re wo'itnu , dewade Ilyamou-Watyatoha mana ema mtie'el plalahwa la'pa edon ghal de itrekan pa nla ' nana riwnu ida rahu wo'awa setengah jam .
I saw the seven angels who stand before God , and seven trumpets were given to them . ||| Dewade a'umkek nana Uplerlawna hopopanni wo'itu mak nhi'inde naprir lia Uplerlawna gaini . Noka rima-rima rlernana noknoka ida .
Another angel came and stood over the altar , having a golden censer . Much incense was given to him , that he should add it to the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar which was before the throne . ||| Hopopna id to ' wal die nodia lari ida maka rwewal nana la maha pa nmai pia ntutrier lia katri'ana gaini . Lar die nhi'inde rnairia pa rtutnia ayalli . Noma rala ayalli kemenyan liawanni meman la e ' a totpa nor wutga Uplerlawna mutnu sniumbaini re enhi ' a la nhioi-tniani la Uplerlawna la ' katri'ana maha makden la liwangeni tiutul die gaini .
The smoke of the incense , with the prayers of the saints , went up before God out of the angel 's hand . ||| Noma ayalli mak kdella lari miaha de ralamni maka hopopan de ntorreria , de rtutnia . Ne mokalli nor wut nieka sniumbaini re rha'at pa la ntut mueman la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni .
The angel took the censer , and he filled it with the fire of the altar , then threw it on the earth . Thunders , sounds , lightnings , and an earthquake followed . ||| La ' noma hopopan de na'ala lari die pa nala ai miakden la katri'ana de pa narialmua lar die . Noma nwa'ala la nohkerna wawannu . Dewade kukru-gauru hita-tlena mana pro ' a-prahka . Ne layera mana nwadawra malwiru-malganna pa nwal lia upkarururu . Noma noha nawnieta-rai nadwiera .
The seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound . ||| Nhorwua dewade Uplerlawna hopopanni wo'itu mak ktorreria noknoka re , rwei tiarg olek pa riwra rega noknokni re wa .
The first sounded , and there followed hail and fire , mixed with blood , and they were thrown to the earth . One third of the earth was burned up , and one third of the trees were burned up , and all green grass was burned up . ||| Hopopan mak kala ' ulu nega noknokni dewade otna anni tah ' i muti hujan es nawah ' a wut nieka ai nor wutga rara pa nwal lia ger otna pa ema rtowriernia nohkerna wawannu . Nohkerna nhiakra ralamni la re'eni wotel die sepertiga , ai na'ana mutnia . Emkade wal lia wewan mota me ora-au mana nhiakra ralamni re'eni wotel die ai namutni-naki'ira .
The second angel sounded , and something like a great burning mountain was thrown into the sea . One third of the sea became blood , ||| Hopopna la ' wornu nega noknokni dewade ha matmiat liawna ida , de yamkekni emekneka wo'or lali ida , maka rnakul targa la hletan lawna . Tah ' i lawan nhiakra ralamni re'eni wotel die sepertiga nwal lia rar mermera .
and one third of the living creatures which were in the sea died . One third of the ships were destroyed . ||| Pede hletan lawna-yoir lawan de nhiakra ralamni la re'eni wotel die , hamormiori honona pala matia . Emkade wal lia loi-puou , motru-kapli .
The third angel sounded , and a great star fell from the sky , burning like a torch , and it fell on one third of the rivers , and on the springs of water . ||| Uplerlawna hopopanni wotellu , nega noknokni dewade wtion lawna ida , de emekneka wtiona watliairi pa ema rwaliernia la nohkerna , de ntuin tar lia ger ormata me gerlawna re la ' a nhiakra ralamni re'eni wotelu sepertiga .
The name of the star is Wormwood . One third of the waters became wormwood . Many people died from the waters , because they were made bitter . ||| Wtion de nanni Absintus Ha mermueru . Pede nhiakra id la wotel ralamni la ger maka wtion de ha ntuin nana , de woliamanni emekneka ha mermueru . La ' pede rimormiori liawanni pala matia , yoma remun gera ha'er die .
The fourth angel sounded , and one third of the sun was struck , and one third of the moon , and one third of the stars , so that one third of them would be darkened , and the day would n't shine for one third of it , and the night in the same way . ||| Nhor nioma Uplerlawna hopopanni wogatni de nega noknokni dewade emeka hadom ntaiya nhiakra id la wotellu ralamni la ' a lera , wolla , me wtiona pede nhiakra id la re'eni wotellu sepertiga de nmati . La ' nhiakra id la re'eni wotelu sepertiga la ler lawan de , de la ' ler ho'ke'eni la ' lera nenenna edonna lelera , emkade wal lia ' melmel gahani .
I saw , and I heard an eagle , flying in mid heaven , saying with a loud voice , Woe ! Woe ! Woe to those who dwell on the earth , because of the other blasts of the trumpets of the three angels , who are yet to sound ! ||| Noma a'umkek nana me a'utlin de ih lawna ida nnem tutul lia heyanna pa nhar lirni pa nhaunu niwra , Mmiati , mmiati . La'pa Uplerlawna hopopanni re wotelu dom to ' wal pia hota rega noknokni , de rimormiori makden la nohkerna wawannu rler la lui-nuhru , polpuol ina-wakwak ama .
The fifth angel sounded , and I saw a star from the sky which had fallen to the earth . The key to the pit of the abyss was given to him . ||| Noma Uplerlawna hopopanni maka wolimni nega noknokni ne a'umkek de wtiona ida maka ema rwalliernia la lyanti pa ntuin olek la noha wawannu . Noma ir rala konsi-ripu la wtion de , la ' a hu'ul matmiat liawna ida mak edon tamkek wikni me it edon tla ' nan ralamni .
He opened the pit of the abyss , and smoke went up out of the pit , like the smoke from a burning furnace . The sun and the air were darkened because of the smoke from the pit . ||| Noma wtion de ed maka kharia hu'ul matmiat die , dewade mokla-mahu nlergot la ralamni , de emolmolla li'ina lawna id mokalli mak kopli-kha ' a . Lera matni me darat lawna mana ai miokla mak kwatiawua hu'ul lawan de npupniahala pede melmela-kalkalma la nohkerna wawannu .
Then out of the smoke came locusts on the earth , and power was given to them , as the scorpions of the earth have power . ||| Noma la ' mokla-mahu ralamni de kongoha-kongoha rtaiyerun la noha wawannu . Kongoha re de Uplerlawna Nala pa rodi plolli , pa emekwalima hodai .
They were told that they should not hurt the grass of the earth , neither any green thing , neither any tree , but only those people who do n't have God 's seal on their foreheads . ||| Nlarna rpa yana rweyata-rwaniawua wewna onde ora-au , onde yawuli-yatniamni re korni . Rlarna pa enekneka rtai tiemna riy maka Uplerlawna hiwliaini edon natniapal ma'ta la reranni-kiorni .
They were given power , not to kill them , but to torment them for five months . Their torment was like the torment of a scorpion when it strikes a person . ||| Kongoha re edonna rodi plolli pa rwunu-rwenna rimormiori re , mere eneknek to'amde ramuki-rama'al hare , nla ' nana wolla wolima . Kongoha re nhienni la hare , de emeknekama hodai nhienni wal lia hare .
In those days people will seek death , and will in no way find it . They will desire to die , and death will flee from them . ||| La ' a wolan tetema wolima , de rimormiori re rahak talan pa rmati , yoma rwarora de samomuounu de ir mat niek wa mere taken niana yoma mak klehu rimormiori aranni edon nwakriania re .
The shapes of the locusts were like horses prepared for war . On their heads were something like golden crowns , and their faces were like people 's faces . ||| Kongoha re yamkekni de rtot nohora kud mak kiwa knehelia ar ralma . La o'tani re de emolmolla wutu-lai miaha e natniapal la . Herni-gaini rtot nohora rimormiori .
They had hair like women 's hair , and their teeth were like those of lions . ||| Moratnu raplalahwa pa emekneka patke ' a moratnu . Ne nihini re emekwalima ohdawra nihini .
They had breastplates like breastplates of iron . The sound of their wings was like the sound of many chariots and horses rushing to war . ||| Ne la ' ihranu re de , emeknekama enala hadom la ra rwowa , de nhoi niohora rain mnotna . Ne liwarni de yetanni emolmolla kreta kuda riwnu-halli mak kler la ar ralma .
They have tails like those of scorpions , with stingers . In their tails they have power to harm men for five months . ||| Ne li'irnu re de naruri-nalai miemna , onnila li'irnu re rodia nhienni pa emekwalima hodai . Pede rnairia li'irnu pa rnahora-rnala ' a rimormiori la wolla wolima .
They have over them as king the angel of the abyss . His name in Hebrew is Abaddon , but in Greek , he has the name Apollyon . ||| Ira ray wamueheni ed mak kodi plolli la ira . Ne ray die ed mak kodi plolli la hu'ula matmiat liawan de . Ir rayni nan yawetni la ' a makden Ibrani de riwra , Abadon nnia'eratni de wnieyata-wnianiawu ne la ' a yawala Yunani de riwra Apolion nnia'eratni de mak kweyata-kwaniawu .
The first woe is past . Behold , there are still two woes coming after this . ||| Matmiati liawna idni nlardoin wa . La'pa nhorwua dewade matmiat liawna wornu la'pa wotellu hota rmai wiali .
The sixth angel sounded . I heard a voice from the horns of the golden altar which is before God , ||| Nhorwua noma Uplerlawna hopopanni la ' wonemni nega noknokni dewade utlin de lira nwatiawua katri'ana maha makden la Uplerlawna gaini de , uhunu wogata .
saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet , Free the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates ! ||| Lir de nakot la hopopna wonemni de niwra , Muewar doinia hopopna wogata re mak kawniut lia gerlawna Efrat de !
The four angels were freed who had been prepared for that hour and day and month and year , so that they might kill one third of mankind . ||| Dewade rewar doinia hopopna re wogata . Hare er mak ha wniahi ' a-wniayod tiarga pa rawuwu-raweiya lera , wolla , wenu , anni maka Uplerlawna Nakottarg oleka wa , totpena rwunu-rwenna rimormioria nohkeran di wawannu la ' noha-rai honona , maka rhakra la ralamni re'eni wotelu .
The number of the armies of the horsemen was two hundred million . I heard the number of them . ||| Noma a'utlin nan lira ida niwra , E rawok nana mak kodia kuda ya'ara mutnu , de liawanni yuta rahu woru .
Thus I saw the horses in the vision and those who sat on them , having breastplates of fiery red , hyacinth blue , and sulfur yellow , and the horses ' heads resembled lions ' heads . Out of their mouths proceed fire , smoke , and sulfur . ||| Noma a'umkek memna mak kha ' a re rnair momuoga rain mnotna maka rala ra rwowa ihranu re , pede yamkekni mermera laliairia , ponpona me marmara pa emeknekamde lali . Kuda-kuda re o'tani emekneka singa o'tani . Ne ai mormiori nor mokla-mahu , me lali rlergot lola wawni ralamni .
By these three plagues , one third of mankind was killed , by the fire , the smoke , and the sulfur , which proceeded out of their mouths . ||| Ai mormiori nor mokalli , me lali mak klergot la kuda re wawni ralamni narieiniande rimormiori makden la nohkerna nhiakra id la wotel ralamni sepertiga pala matia .
For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails . For their tails are like serpents , and have heads , and with them they harm . ||| Kuda re rurni-laini rwatiawua nurnu me la ' walia li'irnu . Li'irnu re emeknekama kodi niy o'tani maka rnairia pa ra rnahora-rnala ' rimormiori .
The rest of mankind , who were not killed with these plagues , did n't repent of the works of their hands , that they would n't worship demons , and the idols of gold , and of silver , and of brass , and of stone , and of wood , which ca n't see , hear , or walk . ||| Mere la'pa rimormiori re korni-tre'eni mak edon kler la matmiati mana , hota edonan wal pia rolli nhiolli-lietni . Ir edonna rollia hegana-kawnu me uplerni-upmatni re nhioini-tnianni la ' limni enni la maha , maha wawahra , pi'ra-watu , au , de uplera-upmati mak edonna kwo'la-klekru .
They did n't repent of their murders , their sorceries , their sexual immorality , or their thefts . ||| Ir wal pia edonna rhopliala hihi'ini-yapyapni mak kpa'eini-kpahala emekneka wniunu-wnienna , lira-yatu nohkerna , yalira-yaliai me kamnelu-kamna ' a .
I saw a mighty angel coming down out of the sky , clothed with a cloud . A rainbow was on his head . His face was like the sun , and his feet like pillars of fire . ||| Noma a'umkek nana hopopna mak karuri-kalai id to ' a nwatiawu Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nernu , de wowta-kakma npupun nana pa emek naniayarni , ne ohni ida , nle'lu nan o'tani . La ' gaini mana emeka lera layarni ne lakni emekneka ai lomarni .
He had in his hand a little open book . He set his right foot on the sea , and his left on the land . ||| La limni de e ntorreria puk ke ' a pniopna ida mere nahniari . Lakni walli malganan de natnikil la tah ' i lawna , ne lakni walli malwiru de natnikil la nohkerna .
He cried with a loud voice , as a lion roars . When he cried , the seven thunders uttered their voices . ||| Ne nhaun de emolmolla ohpora-ohdiawra rapolu . La'pa nhaun pa nhorwua dewade kukur lawna nwahla nhiaunnu pa re'eni wo'itu .
When the seven thunders sounded , I was about to write , but I heard a voice from the sky saying , Seal up the things which the seven thunders said , and do n't write them . ||| La'pa kukru de nhaur re'eni wo'itu , dewade agiwa ghorta lira re , mere a'utlin de lira ida nwatiaga Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa niwra , Muwunmua hya ' maka kukru wo'itu re rakotkota ne yana mhuorta re .
The angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to the sky ||| Ne hopopan mak khapet tiarga lora me ra ' de nran limni walli malganan la lyanti marna
and swore by him who lives forever and ever , who created heaven and the things that are in it , the earth and the things that are in it , and the sea and the things that are in it , that there will no longer be delay , ||| pa nwet la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu nanni , totpa naplol nohora hopopan de lirni . Yoma Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu ed mak kden la Ilwo'itu-Darwionema Sorga , Makohi-maka'ara , kawilla-kayomtia noheri-woru lyanti nayanni , ne E ' ed mak kodi plolli pa nodi liarni . Hopopan de niwra , Ee , ler maka rawuwu-rawei ntutu-nte ' olek di . Pede dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu hota Nhi ' nana-nyap niana hya ' maka Net tiarg oleka wa .
but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel , when he is about to sound , then the mystery of God is finished , as he declared to his servants the prophets . ||| Yoma la'pa ratlin nana hopopna wo'itnu de nega noknokni , de hota Uplerlawna Nhi ' nana-nyap niana hya ' maka Nano'targ oleka wa mere ululu rimormiori raplin mua'ta , de Nlernohora hya ' mak Enakot nohora oleka la makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak khima-kre ' E kniarni .
The voice which I heard from heaven , again speaking with me , said , Go , take the book which is open in the hand of the angel who stands on the sea and on the land . ||| Nhor nioma lira mak kwatiaga Ilyamou-Watyatoha mak a'utlin olek de , nakot owa'an mai a ' u niwra , Mlia ' pa mua'ala puka pniopna mak kawnieran de la ' a hopopan mak khapet tiarga lora-ra ' de limni ralamni .
I went to the angel , telling him to give me the little book . He said to me , Take it and eat it . It will make your stomach bitter , but in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey . ||| Pede alia wuaka puka pniopna ku ' della hopopan de . Noma nakot mai a ' u , Mu'ala hadi pa mu'una . Hota omu'una de , nmer lia apanmu , mere hota la ' o nurmu de minmi'na emeka gan tiuru .
I took the little book out of the angel 's hand , and ate it . It was as sweet as honey in my mouth . When I had eaten it , my stomach was made bitter . ||| Dewade aga'ala puka pniopna ku ' della limni ralamni pa a'una . La a nu'ru de nwoliamnia gani turnu . Mere atiella de a apnu ndorni-ndehen nohor mernu .
They told me , You must prophesy again over many peoples , nations , languages , and kings . ||| Nhorwua noma nhopan pa alia ukot nohor owa'an la ' a hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nror targa Nakot targa oleka pa hota hairi-hairi , me la ' a noh pa'etu-rai piatatra nora leta-leta ror wut nieka wniareini-wniahaurnu honona hota ha rlernana .
A reed like a rod was given to me . Someone said , Rise and measure God 's temple , and the altar , and those who worship in it . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma rala ai dieulu id mai a ' u de emeka ntot nohora lie'ena nhio'ota , ne rakot mai a ' u riwra , Mlia ' pa mliewta mhuo'ota Uplerlawna roma kreini la Yerusalem me katri'ana mesbah mak kden hande . Ne mhuora mriekna riy wo'ira er maka rkola tieru-rawur nehla la ' hande wali .
Leave out the court which is outside of the temple , and do n't measure it , for it has been given to the nations . They will tread the holy city under foot for forty-two months . ||| Mere yan memmemna mhuora-mliewta la Uplerlawna roma kreini gaini to'orni . Yoma la ' gaini to'orni de , ral hade la ' a riy mak edonna katga Orgahi-Orha ' a . Hota hare er mak kwatei-kwahapra leta Yerusalem maka Uplerlawna gahani , la wolla terampwogata wehrani woru .
I will give power to my two witnesses , and they will prophesy one thousand two hundred sixty days , clothed in sackcloth . ||| Ne hota Aghopan doini A tniornu saksi riy woru mak kakot nohora A li'ru-tu'nu . Hota rnairia raini yaluli pa ra rtutga ralam mayo'oni me ralam mehrani onnila rimormiori do'oni-halli . Ne rla rakot nohora A li'ru-tu'nu la wolla terampwogata wehrani woru .
These are the two olive trees and the two lamp stands , standing before the Lord of the earth . ||| Riy maroro ' a ri de , au Saitun maroro ' a irhatta , ne wa'du wniatatgenni rora makden la Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu gaini ralamni . Uplerlawna mak ktorna nohkerna tirni me , krautia lyanit marna ga'arni .
If anyone desires to harm them , fire proceeds out of their mouth and devours their enemies . If anyone desires to harm them , he must be killed in this way . ||| La'pa hameni niwra ntutga yatyatni la mak kakot nohora A li'ru re , hota ha rage ' a ai pa ra rkuhi-rho'ora arwalli re . La emkade pede he'-he ' maka khi ' yatyat la ira , de hota pala matia .
These have the power to shut up the sky , that it may not rain during the days of their prophecy . They have power over the waters , to turn them into blood , and to strike the earth with every plague , as often as they desire . ||| Ir er mak kodi plolli pa ktutuw lyanti pa otna yana nturu , la ' ler maka ir rhaun pa rakot nohor ma'ta lira mak kwatiaga Uplerlawna . Ir er makodi plolli wal pia ger ormata re honona rwal lia rara . Ne rodi plolli wal pia rhi ' a mehra-mau , lui-nuhru nor wutga hya'-hya ' to ' pa ra rliwar nohkerna la ir ralma-rior wamueheni .
When they have finished their testimony , the beast that comes up out of the abyss will make war with them , and overcome them , and kill them . ||| La'pa irakot nohora A li'ru-tu'nu pa nhorwua dewade hamormiori ida mak klergot la hu'ul matmiat liawan de , nora ir pa rwadorni-rwadehena la'pa hamormior die nwenna ira .
Their dead bodies will be in the street of the great city , which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt , where also their Lord was crucified . ||| Ne rmat pia inonni re klololi-klalalia la loi liawna-talan lawna la ' a letlawan maka rla rwair targa ir Matromni la auwlakar hananni . Let de nana tniotnohorni kiasan de de Sodom nora Mesir yoma riy mak kdella let de , do'oni-halli werat rehia .
From among the peoples , tribes , languages , and nations , people will look at their dead bodies for three and a half days , and will not allow their dead bodies to be laid in a tomb . ||| Rimormiori mak kwatiawua hairi-hairi , noh pa'etu-rai piatatra nor wutga leta-leta ror wut nieka wniareini-wniahaurnu hota rpoi-rkeka mak kodia A li'ru-tu'nu re inonni mak kuli-kewta la ' lera wotel riehennu . Ne hota riy rahmena rhuwria mati-molu re inonni .
Those who dwell on the earth will rejoice over them , and they will be glad . They will give gifts to one another , because these two prophets tormented those who dwell on the earth . ||| Riy mak edon kpesiay Uplerlawna makden la nohkeran di wawannu hota rahepur meman la ha rora matmiatni-molmuollu . Hota ri ' a re ramuki-rahepur nohora ha rora matmiatni pede rahe ' i-rahepru ra'ana-remnu me idma nala limtutnu la ida . Rahepuepur reri yoma makodia A li'ru-tu'nu re rora , ta'en niana rodi owa'an ir la nniahora-nniala ' a yoma rmati olekwa .
After the three and a half days , the breath of life from God entered into them , and they stood on their feet . Great fear fell on those who saw them . ||| La'pa lera wotel rehenu dewade Uplerlawna Nala aran mormiori pa nla owa'ana ha rora inonni noma rrora ramat pa rtutrieri . Dewade riy honona mak kamkek nana de ramta'at wenna .
I heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them , Come up here ! They went up into heaven in a cloud , and their enemies saw them . ||| Irrora ratlin de lira polpuolu ida nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa niwra , Ee ! Mmiai lia heyanan di . Ne mak edon kpesiay Uplerlawna re ramkek nana irrora re rha'at la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , de wowta-kakma npupun nana re .
In that day there was a great earthquake , and a tenth of the city fell . Seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake , and the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven . ||| La ' ler de meman pa noha nruru-rai nwo'la . La nhiakra id la termid ralamni sepersepuluh la let de , de namkoha-namnanna . Ne riy riwnu wo'itu rler la matmiati yoma la ' noha nruru-rai nwo'la de . Riy korni ramta'at momuou pa riwa , Ine ! Orgahi-Orha ' a O ' a , Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu mak kdella Ilwo'itu-Darwionema O ' a . O ' ed maka ha ra'uli-rawedi rhu'ru-rhelma pa nodi liarni .
The second woe is past . Behold , the third woe comes quickly . ||| Matmiat liawna wornu to'or olek la wa . Mere mkillia , matmiat liawna wotellu de kekeneka nhari owa'ana .
The seventh angel sounded , and great voices in heaven followed , saying , The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ . He will reign forever and ever ! ||| Dewade Uplerlawna hopopanni mak kmai lia wo'itnu nega noknokni . Pa tatlin de Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu la Ilyamou-Watyatoha rhaunu-rhaun pa riwra , Plola-mneha la nohkerna wawannu dodo'ondi de ed olek la it Orgahi-Orha'ani limni ralamni , me la ' walia mak E Ntutmuata-nkewra ' a pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori . Hota E ' ed mak kodi plolli pa nodia liarni .
The twenty-four elders , who sit on their thrones before God 's throne , fell on their faces and worshiped God , ||| Dewade riy terampworu wehrani wogata mak khi ' o'ta-mata mak kamtatan la liwangen tiutulu mak kden la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni de , honona rwaltiora-rwaltieman la Uplerlawna lakni nayanni .
saying , We give you thanks , Lord God , the Almighty , the one who is and who was , because you have taken your great power and reigned . ||| Rhar lirni pa riwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna Makodi plolli , mak kdena ne mak kden olek la . Ama'uli-mawedi O ' a yoma Omniairi oleka O plolmu pa ma Mpuarehi-mpuatali . Ne O hairmu nawnianin wa .
The nations were angry , and your wrath came , as did the time for the dead to be judged , and to give your bondservants the prophets , their reward , as well as to the saints and those who fear your name , to the small and the great , and to destroy those who destroy the earth . ||| Rimormiori mak kahmena klernohora Orgahi-Orha ' a de hururi-wowo'ora mere nte ' olek la lerni pa Omulgota hankeranmu ne nte ' olek wal lia lerni pa Omhudi-mpuara rimormiori mak kmati ri wa pa Omuala siewa-kai la mak khima-kre ' O kniarmu , de makwohorulu-ktatrulu me la ' walia O mutmu-rahamu honona mak ka'unni-kamta'ata , mak khu'ru-khelam tiy O ' a kuku'uni-lalawanni . Dodo'ondi wa de nte'la lerni pa Mpueyata-mpuaniawua riy mak kweyata-kwaniawua ir rimormior wialli la nohkeran di wawannu .
God 's temple that is in heaven was opened , and the ark of the Lord 's covenant was seen in his temple . Lightnings , sounds , thunders , an earthquake , and great hail followed . ||| Noma Uplerlawna romni nayanni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha mana nhiarni naphyar wia ne tamkek nana luwuau-koplahu maka Uplerlawna riorni-liaini genni . Ne hita-tlena kukru-gauru idma nhaur nan ida me nohkerna nruru-rai miarna nwo'la lol etnu liolli . Ne otna tah ' i muti mana ntur wuerwerta hujan es .
A great sign was seen in heaven , a woman clothed with the sun , and the moon under her feet , and on her head a crown of twelve stars . ||| Noma plin-plinnianamde tamkek la lyanti de hadomdoma namehi-nayona . De patke ' ida nhi ' a lera la naniayarni pa nhapar rer lia wolla . La o'tani de nnairia wutu-lai maka rala wtiona termida wehrani wor pua ra ralipa-ralaiya .
She was with child . She cried out in pain , laboring to give birth . ||| Patke ' de e na'apuapnu ne wolanni mana ntu'tu pa niwa nayor wia pa polpuolu-hawaunia la apun mehrani .
Another sign was seen in heaven . Behold , a great red dragon , having seven heads and ten horns , and on his heads seven crowns . ||| Me a'umkek wal lia lyanti de hadomdom etla de edonna tamkek targa . De niy liawna mermera ida , de o'tani wo'itu me dudallu termida . La o'tani nenenna , de rnair momuoga wutu-lai ida .
His tail drew one third of the stars of the sky , and threw them to the earth . The dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth , so that when she gave birth he might devour her child . ||| Nnairia li'irnu pa na nnunia wtiona no ' lyanti re la ' nhiakra wotelu ralamni sepertiga pa nwalia la nohkerna wawannu . Nhor nioka niy liawan de ntutrier lia pat mak kiwa kmor die gaini totpena niwa nlumua a'nani .
She gave birth to a son , a male child , who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron . Her child was caught up to God and to his throne . ||| Noma pat de nakrehen gota a'nani muanke ' a ida mak hota nodi plolli la rimormiori nohkeran di , de nnairia lie'ena mnotna . Mere papay die , Uplerlawna hopopanni ida nwarui niana la inni riwni , pa nodia la Uplerlawna la liwangen tiutulu die .
The woman fled into the wilderness , where she has a place prepared by God , that there they may nourish her one thousand two hundred sixty days . ||| Dewade pat de nawlar pia nokru wo'orletna-kawurloini , la ' a gen miaka Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targ oleka la e wa . La ' gen die , de hota e rtera-rlahu nana lera riwnu ida rahu woru terampwonema .
There was war in the sky . Michael and his angels made war on the dragon . The dragon and his angels made war . ||| Dewade ar lawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Uplerlawna hopopanni o'ta-mata ida mak kwawa Mikhail , nora hopopanni re , rtutria niy liawan de . Ne niy liawan de hopopanni mana rre ' teman la niy liawan de pa rrora Mikhail ra'ara .
They did n't prevail . No place was found for them any more in heaven . ||| Mere Mikhail nala niy liawan della yawa . Noma niy liawan de nor wut nieka hopopanni re , Uplerlawna edon Nwayow nohora pa rden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
The great dragon was thrown down , the old serpent , he who is called the devil and Satan , the deceiver of the whole world . He was thrown down to the earth , and his angels were thrown down with him . ||| Mere enor wutga hopopanni re , de rnaklia la pliorni pa rerun la nohkerna wawannu . Hadi de niy kolkuolu inhatta mak kwawa Hegana amlawanni onde Setan inhatta maka kodia pudi-akla la rimormiori nohkeran di .
I heard a loud voice in heaven , saying , Now the salvation , the power , and the Kingdom of our God , and the authority of his Christ has come , for the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down , who accuses them before our God day and night . ||| Rnaklia la pliorni dewade utlin de lira prakrahka ida nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa niwra , Lera inhatti pa Uplerlawna Nalewna rimormiorni . Dodo'ondi Uplerlawna Ntutga lodanni-hairni . La'pa dodo'ondi de Ray maka Uplerlawna Nano'targa pa Namori-nalewna rimormiori de Ntutga plolli-mneheni . Yoma hegana amlawanni mak kwaghala riy makpesiay la Uplerlawna gaini ralamni la ' lelera-melmela re , ema rho'or dodioini oleka la Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
They overcame him because of the Lamb 's blood , and because of the word of their testimony . They did n't love their life , even to death . ||| It mutwualli makpesiay re , rrehi-rtarg olek hegana amlawanni onnila Dum A'na matmiatni me rarni mak kaktiowur doin la la it do'oni-halli wawannu , me onnila edon rawlar lia matmiati mere yeher nekpa rla rakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu la ' a Yesus .
Therefore rejoice , heavens , and you who dwell in them . Woe to the earth and to the sea , because the devil has gone down to you , having great wrath , knowing that he has but a short time . ||| Hade pede Ilyamou-Watyatoha nor wutga mniotni honona mihe ' i-mihepru ! Mere nohkerna wawannu nor wutga lora-wo'ora rler la matmiat liawna yoma hegana amlawanni nerun pa ntutg oleka hankeranni-ralmha'arni , yoma enatga de hota edon nalo'on wali ne lerni pa nhi ' yatyatni nhor olekwa .
When the dragon saw that he was thrown down to the earth , he persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male child . ||| La'pa niy liawan de natga de rhopli oleka la noha wawannu , pede nhapartikil targho ' a pat maka kayoria a'na muanke ' de .
Two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman , that she might fly into the wilderness to her place , so that she might be nourished for a time , times , and half a time , from the face of the serpent . ||| Mere ral oleka ih lawna liwarni wor lia ' pat de totpena nnem pa nla ' geni id la wo'orletna-kawurloini mak Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targ oleka la e ' wa , totpena nmormiori-nlewlewna , yoma hota ha rtera-rlahga la hande pa nla ' nana anni wotelu rehenu totpa yana niy liawan de nka'ma nana .
The serpent spewed water out of his mouth after the woman like a river , that he might cause her to be carried away by the stream . ||| Dewade niy de npira gera liawanni pa nawlar niohora pat de , totpena gera nwau dioinia la .
The earth helped the woman , and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river which the dragon spewed out of his mouth . ||| Mere nohkerna nhima-nre ' a pat de , de nohkerna nwer wawni pa nlumu-ntella ger maka niy liawan de npir de .
The dragon grew angry with the woman , and went away to make war with the rest of her offspring , who keep God 's commandments and hold Jesus ' testimony . ||| Noka niy liawna nahankeran doin la ' pat de , pa la nhokra-nlai tiargho ' a patke ' de a'nani korni , de la ' a riy honona mak khu'ru-khelam la Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu me rakot nohora Yesus .
Then I stood on the sand of the sea . I saw a beast coming up out of the sea , having ten horns and seven heads . On his horns were ten crowns , and on his heads , blasphemous names . ||| Noma a'umkek nan walia hamormiori ida nlergot la tah ' i lawna ralamni . Hamormior die dudallu termida me o'tani wo'itu . La dudallu honona re , de rnairia wutu-lai nenenna . Me la ' o'tani re de e rhorat targa nan yapolu-yaliella la Uplerlawna yoma niwra e ' de Uplerlawna inhat e ' a .
The beast which I saw was like a leopard , and his feet were like those of a bear , and his mouth like the mouth of a lion . The dragon gave him his power , his throne , and great authority . ||| Hamormiori miaka a'umkek nan de , de emolmolan nekama oh dawar mak klol au hananni . Ne lakni emolmolla beruang , ne hgotni emekneka ohdawra mak klihir matmata-khaw riarara hgotni . Dewade niy liawan de nala rurni-laini me tullu-petan wamueheni la hamormiori die .
One of his heads looked like it had been wounded fatally . His fatal wound was healed , and the whole earth marveled at the beast . ||| La ' a o'tani id la hamormiori o'tani re wo'itu , de yamkekni emeknekama no ' lawna enni maka rala wehla ra rwen oleka de mere matmiat tiehra . Mak kden la noha uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani , mak edon kpesiay Yesusa , er rlernohor reria hamormior die pa e rwer rer wiawni la hamormior die .
They worshiped the dragon because he gave his authority to the beast , and they worshiped the beast , saying , Who is like the beast ? Who is able to make war with him ? ||| Ne honona re ra'uli niy liawan de yoma enal oleka plolli-mneheni la hamormiori die . Ne ir mana ra'uli wialia hamormiori die yoma rwarora de Uplerlawna inhatta hade . Pede honona re riwra , Riy id mana edonna nareh niana hamormior di ! Taken niana riy rora hadi ra'ara , yoma edon rpar nana .
A mouth speaking great things and blasphemy was given to him . Authority to make war for forty-two months was given to him . ||| Uplerlawna Nhur niohora hamormior die pa nakot nohora tullu-petanni , me nalernu-naha ' a Uplerlawna kotni-nanni . Uplerlawna Nhur niohor walia pa nodi plolli pa nla ' nana wolla terampwogata wehrani woru .
He opened his mouth for blasphemy against God , to blaspheme his name , his dwelling , and those who dwell in heaven . ||| Hade pede napolu-naliella Uplerlawna kotni-nanni . La ' walia napolu-naliella Uplerlawna genni-tienni la Ilyamou-Watyatoha nor wutga riy makpesiay mak kden hande .
It was given to him to make war with the saints and to overcome them . Authority over every tribe , people , language , and nation was given to him . ||| Uplerlawna Nhur niohor walia pa nora Uplerlawna mutnu-pepanni rahuri-rawo'ora , ne nala ir la yawa . Ne lodna-hairi , noh pa'etu-rai piatatra , leta-leta ror wut nieka wniareini-wniahaurnu , de honona mak kden la lyanti nayanni di , de e ed mak ktorna-krautia .
All who dwell on the earth will worship him , everyone whose name has not been written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who has been killed . ||| Hota hamormiori die ed maka rimormior mak kden noha wawannu rhu'ru-rhelma . Eneknek to ' a riy maka nanni e rhorat targ oleka la puka maka rken tiarga rimormiori honona nanni mak hota kmormiori pia nodi liarni , de edonna rhu'ru-rhelam la hamormior die . Puk de , de Dum A'na maka rwenan de gahani , ne la ' ler maka Uplerlawna edon Nohi-na'ar ma'ta nohkeran di , de e rhorat targ oleka la puka , de riy honona nanni mak hota kler la mormiori-dardiari .
If anyone has an ear , let him hear . ||| La ' hade pede la'pa mirur lia yatlina de mhiu'ula tlinmi-mpiera matmi la lir mak ha rakot mak emkadilla ,
If anyone is to go into captivity , he will go into captivity . If anyone is to be killed with the sword , he must be killed . Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints . ||| Uplerlawna Netli olek la pa rtorna makpesiay doma , ne makpesiay dom to ' mana Eneti olek la pa rler la wniunu-wnienna . Pa hota plol toto ' pa rler la roma nhio'la ralamni onde wniunu-wnienna . La ' hade pede la'pa makpesiay mlier la hare , de mitatahan nek ralammi la kropna-krieutu ralamni me mdienrer lia pesiaymi .
I saw another beast coming up out of the earth . He had two horns like a lamb and it spoke like a dragon . ||| Noka a'umkek nan walia hamormiori id owa'ana nlergot la nohkeran di ralamni . Hamormior die dudallu woru de emolmolla dum a'na dudallu . Mere nhar lirni de emekneka niy liawna lirni .
He exercises all the authority of the first beast in his presence . He makes the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first beast , whose fatal wound was healed . ||| Hamormiori di de nlernan plola-mneha la hamormior mak kala ' ulu . Ne nala plola-mneh de , pa nodia hamormior mak kala ' ulu die lirni me kniarni . La ' nohkeran di wawannu honona de nterna pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla la hamormiori maka kala ' ul die mak ululu nado'or nohor no ' lawan mak dodo'ondi di nmog olek de .
He performs great signs , even making fire come down out of the sky to the earth in the sight of people . ||| Hamormior wornu de nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi yawiru-yawewla mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga e rurni-laini totpa rod riy lia klieratni . La riy rahu gaini ralamni de nhi ' a ai pa nwatiawu mueman la lyanti pa nerun la noha wawannu .
He deceives my own people who dwell on the earth because of the signs he was granted to do in front of the beast , saying to those who dwell on the earth that they should make an image to the beast who had the sword wound and lived . ||| Emkade pede Uplerlawna Nhur niohora hamormior wornu de nnairi rurni-laini pa nhi ' a hihi ' a-yapyapi yawiru-yawewla mak kamehi-kayona na nalahara riy honona mak kmormior lia noha wawannu re honona , la ' a hamormior mak kala ' ulu die rerieini . Me enhopan wali rira pa rariria atiehra ida totpena riy rhu'ru-rhelam e ' a . Rariria atiehra de rtolliohora hamormior miak kala ' ulu die , maka rala wehla ra rwen olek de , mere matmiat tiehra .
It was given to him to give breath to the image of the beast , that the image of the beast should both speak , and cause as many as would n't worship the image of the beast to be killed . ||| Uplerlawna Nhur niohora hamormior wornu de pa nala atiehra de aranni totpena naltieri , ne nhopan pa rwunu-rwenna riy honona mak edonna khu'ru-khelam la uplera-upmat die .
He causes all , the small and the great , the rich and the poor , and the free and the slave , to be given marks on their right hands or on their foreheads , ||| Rimormioria kuku'uni-lalawanni , makakleha-maktaru , ata onde marna , de hamormiori wornu de ntekal reria pa rhoiya limni malganna onde reranni pa rkenia kniaunu .
and that no one would be able to buy or to sell unless he has that mark , which is the name of the beast or the number of his name . ||| Hamormior wornu de edon nwayow pa riy ra'olu-rala ' a hadomdoma , eneknek to'ama riy maka kniau de nden la limni onde reranni , yoma kniau de ed mak kodia aharia hamormiori mak kala ' ulu die nanni onde wniarekanni la ' nanni de .
Here is wisdom . He who has understanding , let him calculate the number of the beast , for it is the number of a man . His number is six hundred sixty-six . ||| Riy mak katu kwateti-kwaneha hota er maka rna'erit nan hadi . Riy meni mak katu de hota nwarekna hamormiori mak kala ' ulu die kniaunu nnia'eratni . Yoma rhor nohor rrekan nana kniaunu de , de nla ' nana rahu wonema terampwonema wehrani wonema . Wniarekan de , de nnia'eratni de rimormiori id e ' a .
I saw , and behold , the Lamb standing on Mount Zion , and with him a number , one hundred forty-four thousand , having his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads . ||| Nhorwua noma a'umkek owa'ana yamkeka ida . A'umkek de Dum A'na de Ntuttutrier lia wo'or Sion wawannu , Nor rewre'wa riy riwnu rahu ida terampwogata wehrani wogata maka rhorat targa Dum A'na de nanni la rima-rima reranni-kiorni me Dum A'na de Amni nanni wali .
I heard a sound from heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of a great thunder . The sound which I heard was like that of harpists playing on their harps . ||| Ne a'utlin walia lira yetanni nwatiaga Ilyamou-Watyatoha de emekneka yo'or lawna ne , anin lawna mak kodia ihini-turnu pa kukur lawna ema rgorrernia . Lir de a'utlin de emolmolla tiwla-prai mak kwatiaga riy maka kahe ' i-kahepru .
They sing a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders . No one could learn the song except the one hundred forty-four thousand , those who had been redeemed out of the earth . ||| La ' a liwangen tiutulu die gaini me hamormiori re wogata ror wutga o'ta-mata mak kpepan reria liwangen tiutulu die gaini , de riy riwnu rahu ida terampwogata wehrani wogata re , e rwahniarnar reria nhiar warwuaru ida . La ' a nhiar de de , riy id mana ta'en niana rwahniara , enekneka riy riwnu rahu ida terampwogata wehrani wogata re , de riy mak kwatiawua nohkerna wawannu , maka Yesus rarni na Ntuwu-nhai nian oleka inhatta re .
These are those who were not defiled with women , for they are virgins . These are those who follow the Lamb wherever he goes . These were redeemed by Jesus from among men , the first fruits to God and to the Lamb . ||| Ir edon rheik nan ma'ta do ' a-hala , emeka tuwari-laweru mak katiak reria totpena edon nora patke ' a ralira-raliai . Ir er mak klernohor reria Dum A'na de lol meni-meni to ' a . La ' a rimormiori honona , de ir er maka Yesus Ntuwu-nhaiya totpena Nhi ' ir pa emolmolan nekama liola limtutnu maka ral ulu la ' a Uplerlawna nor Dum A'na .
In their mouth was found no lie , for they are blameless . ||| Ir edonna rputra-rpalak taru me edonna rhi ' taru do ' a-hala kuku ' eti .
I saw an angel flying in mid heaven , having an eternal Good News to proclaim to those who dwell on the earth-to every nation , tribe , language , and people . ||| Noma a'umkek nana hopopna id wali die nnem tutul lia lyanti pa nakot nohora Kot Kalwieda-Paitiota mak kodi unut la tuw di , me la'pa nodi liarni . Hopopan de e nnem la lyanti totpena nakot nohor la ' a hairi-hairi me la ' a noh pa'etu-rai piatatra nora leta-leta ror wut nieka wniareini-wniahaurnu , la ' a riy honona la ' nohkeran di wawannu .
He said with a loud voice , Fear the Lord , and give him glory , for the hour of his judgment has come . Worship him who made the heaven , the earth , the sea , and the springs of waters ! ||| Hopopan de nhaun pa niwra , Mhiu'ru-mhielma , mi'unni-mimta'ata Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , me mi'uli-miwedia la ' gen tiutullu . Yoma nte ' olek la mai lerni pa Uplerlawna Ntoran watghudi la rimormiori honona . Mtiuklia E ' a . E ' ed mak khi ' nana lyanti , nohkerna , lora-wo'ora , me ger ormata re honona .
Another , a second angel , followed , saying , Babylon the great has fallen , which has made all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality . ||| Hopopna wornu , mak klernohora hopopna mak kala ' ulu wal pia nhari lirni niwra , Babel de , de let matmiat liawan ida ntuini lie'enu-nlawra hgerni rweyata-rwaniawua olekwa , yoma riy makden hande , de rtota hairi-hairi pa rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioini Uplerlawna , emolmolan nekama patke ' yata ida nala arak mikmikri na nhuri ama'wua muanke ' a pa na na'hira re .
Another angel , a third , followed them , saying with a great voice , If anyone worships the beast and his image , and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand , ||| Noma hopopna mak wotellu nma nlernohora hopopna maroro ' a mak kala ' ulu re pa nhaunu niwra , Hameni ed mak kola tieru-kawur nehla la hamormior die nora uplera-upmatni , me maka rlernan nan walia kniaunu la reranni onde limni ,
he also will drink of the wine of the wrath of God , which is prepared unmixed in the cup of his anger . He will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb . ||| de riy de hota nemnia Uplerlawna lari hankeranni mak kodia E yawenan lawanni . Ne hota Uplerlawna hankeranni-ralmha'arni la ira edon nwadur nan oke ' a . Pede riy mak khu'ru-khelam la hamormiori die nora atiehrani , de hota rnahora-rnala ' a la ai kwiari liali la hopopna-hopopna mak kakleha do ' a-hala malaikat gaini ralamni , me la ' walia Dum A'na de gaini ralamni .
The smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever . They have no rest day and night , those who worship the beast and his image , and whoever receives the mark of his name . ||| Lelera-melmela , de mak kola tieru-kawur nehla la hamormior die nor atiehrani , me riy honona mak knairia hamormior die nanni pa ra rtapla rakniaga , de hoho ' a-hayaya la ai mormiori ralamni edonna nakatetia .
Here is the perseverance of the saints , those who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus . ||| Hota emkade pede ina-nara mak kla ' Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , mak khu'ru-khelma Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu me mak kden rer lia pesiaymi la Yesus , mitetehra ralammi la ' hya'-hya ' to'owa .
I heard a voice from heaven saying , Write , ‘ Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on . ' Yes , says the Spirit , that they may rest from their labors , for their works follow with them . ||| Nhorwua dewade a'utlin nan walia lira ida nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa niwra , Mhuorta hadilla . La'pa nwaga mulai la dodo'ondi , de rimormiori miak kmat lia Orgahi-Orha ' a nanni de mlier la unut lawna . Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli Niwra , Plola hota ir rrena la ir liwatnu-odawni . Yoma hota la ' ira dnienrerni setia la ' Uplerlawna de ed maka ir rlernan owa'ana nhierannu wniahlani .
I looked , and saw a white cloud , and on the cloud one sitting like a son of man , having on his head a golden crown , and in his hand a sharp sickle . ||| Nhorwua noma a'umkek nana kakam wok wawahra ida . La ' a kakam de wawannu , yamkekni emolmolla Rimormiori ida e Namtatna . La o'tani de e Nnairia wutu-lai miaha . Me e Ntorreria wehla plalahwa ploklokra sabit maka rnairia pa ra rorin la nhyi ' ralma .
Another angel came out of the temple , crying with a loud voice to him who sat on the cloud , Send your sickle and reap , for the hour to reap has come , for the harvest of the earth is ripe ! ||| Nhor nioma hopopna id owa'an pa nlergot la Uplerlawna romni nayanni , nhaun pa nakot la Mak kamtatan la kakam de wawannu niwra , Mrian la wehlamu de pa ma Mpuahewar wa , yoma nte ' olek la lerni pa noha nreiki wo'orni wa .
He who sat on the cloud thrust his sickle on the earth , and the earth was reaped . ||| Noma Mak kamtatan la kakma wawannu de Nala wehla plalahwa ploklokar sabit de na Nwahewra noha wawannu .
Another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven . He also had a sharp sickle . ||| Noma a'umkek owa'an hopopna id to ' wal pia nlergot la Uplerlawna romni nayanni mak kden la Ilyamou-Watyatoha . Ntorrer wialia ta'wa ploklokra ida .
Another angel came out from the altar , he who has power over fire , and he called with a great voice to him who had the sharp sickle , saying , Send your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth , for the earth 's grapes are fully ripe ! ||| Nhorwua noma hopopna id owa'ana mak kodi plolli la ai la ' a katri'ana , nwatiawu katri'ana de pa nma nhaun pa nakot la hopopan mak ktorreria ta'wa mak kaploklokar de , niwra , Muala ta'wamu de pa ma mtietia la ' anggur wo'oni makden la noha wawannu yoma wo'oni re rgawar wa !
The angel thrust his sickle into the earth , and gathered the vintage of the earth and threw it into the great wine press of the wrath of God . ||| Pede hopopan de naloiyernia ta'wani la noha wawannu pa na nwatetia anggur re wo'oni . Nhoru nioma nhopliala gen miaka ra rahmia anggur turu die , maka nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna Nahankerna-ralmha'ara .
The wine press was trodden outside of the city , and blood came out of the wine press , up to the bridles of the horses , as far as one thousand six hundred stadia . ||| Anggur wo ' a de rahmia hare turnu la ' a leta to'orni . Ne nwatiaga gen miaka ra rahmia anggur turu re de rara nwawuau emolmolla ger wawuau olieta kilu rahu wotelu , me rara tullu re ' a id rehenu .
I saw another great and marvelous sign in the sky , seven angels having the seven last plagues , for in them God 's wrath is finished . ||| Nhorwua noma a'umkek nan la Ilyamou-Watyatoha de hadoma mak kamehi-kayona me edon tamkek targa . A'umkek la de Uplerlawna hopopanni riy wo'itu mak kodi plolli la mehra-mau lawna la ' hohoni wa . Eda di de la'awa hohoni la Uplerlawna Nhuri-nwalia hankeranni-ralmha'arni .
I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire , and those who overcame the beast , his image , and the number of his name , standing on the sea of glass , having harps of God . ||| La ' noma a'umkek walia hadomdom emeknekama hletan lawna mak kamememi , de nawniotra-nawniah ' a nor ai . A'umkek walia riy mak ka'unut nan oleka yoma ir rahmena rhu'ru-rhelam la hamormiori me uplera-upmatni ne edonna rwayow pa hamormiori die nanni mak ha wniarekna de rahu wonema , terampwonema , wehrani wonema de ha rtapla la ir reranni-kiorni . Riy mak ka'untu re raprir lia hletna aratni pa ra rtorreria hadom emeka gitara kecapi mak Uplerlawna Nal nana la ira .
They sang the song of Moses , the servant of God , and the song of the Lamb , saying , Great and marvelous are your works , Lord God , the Almighty ! Righteous and true are your ways , you King of the nations . ||| Honona re rwatunu-rwahniara Musa , Uplerlawna hopopan de , nhiarni me la ' wali Dum A'na nhiarni mak emkadilla , Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna mak kden la tutullu-lolo'oni ! O inponmu de nahedu-nawairia ami , me O hihi'imu-yapyapmu takenia mparor nana . Mhi ' oleka Ray lia rimormiori makden la hairi-hairi honona ! Tnioranmu plolli-mneheni ! O hihi'imu-yapyapmu ploloi-plele'era mai am lia nohkeran di wawannu .
Who would n't fear you , Lord , and glorify your name ? For you only are holy . For all the nations will come and worship before you . For your righteous acts have been revealed . ||| Hota he ' wal pia edonna namta'at O ' a , Orgahi-Orha ' u ne ? Me hota he ' wal pia edonna nakot nohora O tutulmu-lolo'omu Matromlawnu ne ? Ntut tiar lia O muemeh ' a nanpa Mmuou-mpitna . Rimormior nohkerna honona hota rma rkolla O lakmu , yoma iramkek nana hihi'imu-yapyapmu makden la plol wawannu .
After these things I looked , and the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened . ||| Nhor nioma a'umkek walia Uplerlawna roma kreini la Ilyamou-Watyatoha , de Uplerlawna romni Kemah me gen lululi maka rkenia Uplerlawna riora-liaini , deullu-tatarni la ralamni de nhiarni naphyariari .
The seven angels who had the seven plagues came out , clothed with pure , bright linen , and wearing golden sashes around their chests . ||| Noma hopopna wo'itu mak kodi plolli la mehra-mau liawna re wo'itu mana , rlergot la Uplerlawna romni ralamni . Honona re naniayarni maka ratenin nana la ahwa mnurnuhru , de rmou-rwitna me liplipa-kamka'ma . Ne ihranu de ral maha ra rwowa .
One of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God , who lives forever and ever . ||| La ' noma hamormiori id la ' hamormiori wogata , nala lari miaha la hopopna re wo'itu . Lari miaha re rpenpuen lia Uplerlawna mak kodi plolli pa nodi liarni de yawenan lawanni .
The temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power . No one was able to enter into the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels would be finished . ||| La Uplerlawna romni ralamni de ai miokla npupun nana . Ai miokal de nnia'eratni de Uplerlawna hititni-repreparni tutullu-lolo'oni plollolli-mneneheni . Ne la'pa mehra-mau liawna re wo'itu mak hopopna re wo'itu rodia re de edonna rtutu-rte ' ma'ta , de riy id mana ta'en niana nhu'ru la Uplerlawna romni de ralamni .
I heard a loud voice out of the temple , saying to the seven angels , Go and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God on the earth ! ||| Noma a'utlin walia lir lawna ida nwatiawu Uplerlawna romni nayanni pa nakot la hopopna re wo'itu , niwra , Mlia ' pa mtiowur doinia Uplerlawna larni hankeranni re wo'itu mak kodia Uplerlawna yawenan lawanni la ' a nohkerna wawannu .
The first went , and poured out his bowl into the earth , and it became a harmful and painful sore on the people who had the mark of the beast , and who worshiped his image . ||| Noma hopopna ida nala ' ul pua ntowur doinia Uplerlawna yawenan lawanni mak kden la lar di la ' a noha wawannu . Dewade rimormiori honona maka rala hamormiori yatyat de nanni wniarekanni ha ra rtapal nana re me rruru ' u-rtowtowar la uplera-upmatni de , honona re rlernana wihila-wa'ala mak nananni nhona .
The second angel poured out his bowl into the sea , and it became blood as of a dead man . Every living thing in the sea died . ||| Nhorwua noma hopopna wornu nwalia lari mak kodi Uplerlawna yawenan lawanni la hletan lawna . Dewade hletan lawna de nwal lia rar mak kahuwu-kawoini emekwalima rimormiori maka rwenan nana rarni . Nreiniande hamormiori honona miak kdella lor gahani re pala matia .
The third poured out his bowl into the rivers and springs of water , and they became blood . ||| Nhor nioma hopopna wotellu nwal dioinia larni mniotni la ' a gerlawna re , me la ' walia ger ormata re , dewade gera re honona rwal lia rara .
I heard the angel of the waters saying , You are righteous , who are and who were , O Holy One , because you have judged these things . ||| Noka a'utlin de hopopan mak kodi plolli la gera-tah ' i nhar lirni pa niwra , Uplerlawnu ne , ami edonna mrehgor niana plolmu-mnehemu moumu-witanmu re ! O ' ed mak kden ulg olekwa me O ' ed mak kdenreri . Niukum lawan mak Omulernu ri , de raplola !
For they poured out the blood of saints and prophets , and you have given them blood to drink . They deserve this . ||| Yoma hare er mak kwunu-kwen oleka Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu , me ir er mak kwen oleka makwohorulu-ktatrulu . Pede dodo'ondi de O ' ed mak kala rara pa ir remun la . Yoma plolli inhatta pa orgahi re rlernana nhiakarni de .
I heard the altar saying , Yes , Lord God , the Almighty , true and righteous are your judgments . ||| Noma a'utlin de lira nwatiaga lutur katri'ana pa niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu , Makden la Ilwo'itu-Darwionema , Mak kodi plolli la haneknek wawannu . Plol toto ' a de hya ' maka Omua Mukmua rira de edonna npa'eini-npahala .
The fourth poured out his bowl on the sun , and it was given to him to scorch men with fire . ||| Nhor nioma hopopna wogatni nhuria larni mniotni la ' lera . Dewade lera nodi plolli pa nhit amutni-aki'ira rimormiori .
People were scorched with great heat , and people blasphemed the name of God who has the power over these plagues . They did n't repent and give him glory . ||| La'pa lera nhit amutni-aki'ir rimormiori re , noma rwohora-rtatra Uplerlawna kotni-nanni mak kodi plolli pa Nala niukum lawna rilla ' rimormiori . La'pa emkade ho'mana riy id mana edonna nhoitio'or doini-ntahnei dioinia nhiolli-lietni , ne nahmena na'uli-nawedia Uplerlawna la gen tiutullu .
The fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast , and his kingdom was darkened . They gnawed their tongues because of the pain , ||| Nhor nioma hopopna wolimni nhuria larni mniotni la hamormiori yatyat de liwangen tiutullu . Dewade riy honona mak katlin la hamormiori die genni-tienni honona rewre'wa pa rler la mel'uta-malienni . Ne rimormiori ri honona rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni onnila Uplerlawna larni mniotni mak irlernana .
and they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores . They still did n't repent of their works . ||| Dewade honona re rlokra-rhautia Uplerlawna la Ilyamou-Watyatoha yoma la ' a wihila-wa'ala re mehrani-maunu la ' temni . La emkade ho'mana riy id mana edonna nhoitio'or doini-ntahnei dioinia hihi'ini-yapyapni .
The sixth poured out his bowl on the great river , the Euphrates . Its water was dried up , that the way might be prepared for the kings that come from the sunrise . ||| Nhorwua noma hopopna wonemni nhuria larni mniotni la gerlawna Efrat de . Dewade gerlawna die mana nkerna-nhau , totpena Uplerlawna Nwahi ' targa pa ray-ray mak kwatiaga tipru re honona rala ' lol ralamni .
I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon , and out of the mouth of the beast , and out of the mouth of the false prophet , three unclean spirits , something like frogs , ||| Noma a'umkek nan walia hegana wotelu , de yamkekni emekneka kakhar gera . Ida nlergot la niy liawan de wawni ralamni , id la hamormiori mak klergot olek la tah ' i lawna de wawni , me id owa'an la hamormiori mak kalahar pa khi ' a makwohorulu-ktatrulu , die wawni .
for they are spirits of demons , performing signs , which go out to the kings of the whole inhabited earth , to gather them together for the war of that great day of God the Almighty . ||| Hegana re rhi ' la ' a-mai nieka hihi ' a-yapyapi mak kamehi-kayona mak ktutga ruri-lai totpena nawiru-nawewla rimormiori . Hegana re wotelu rla rtot nana ray-ray re la ' a noheri woru , ne rawok pa rna'ohma yawunu-yawenna la ' ler mak hota Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu Nano'taru olek pa Nkuhi-nho'or doini arwalli re . Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu de ed mak kodi plolli la hanek-harahu wuawannu .
Behold , I come like a thief . Blessed is he who watches , and keeps his clothes , so that he does n't walk naked , and they see his shame . ||| Mitlina ! Hota Amuai die emekneka mak kwuri-kgalmu . La ' hade pede hota nhioratmi la ' temmi me mitiak reria nhiolmi-lietmi ilu-wniehwami pa nkalwiedweda , totpena hota mlier la unut lawna . Mhi ' inonmi emeknekama riy ida mak edon kanin matni mere natiak reria hyonni-hyanni de hota edonna nmola-nma ' a la rira yamkekni , yoma edon natliawihi .
He gathered them together into the place which is called in Hebrew , Harmagedon . ||| Noma hegana re rawoka ray-raya re la ' a gen miaka Ibrani ha rweta la Harmagedon .
The seventh poured out his bowl into the air . A loud voice came out of the temple of heaven , from the throne , saying , It is done ! ||| Nhorwua noma hopopna wo'itnu ntow dioinia larni mniotni la darat letgara . Dewade lir lawna ida nwatiaga liwangen tutulu la ' Uplerlawna romni nayanni pa niwra , Niukmu hohoni hadi !
There were lightnings , sounds , and thunders , and there was a great earthquake such as has not happened since there were men on the earth-so great an earthquake and so mighty . ||| Dewade hita-tlena nkaili-nkaili me kukru-gauru mana yetanni idma ni'it nan ida la ' walia noha nruru-rai nwo'la . La ululu meman la Orgahi-Orha ' a Na'ohi-na'ara nohkeran di nora lyanti la'pa ntutu-nte'ela lera hohoni di , de edonna tamkek ma'ta noh nruru-rai nwo'la mak emkadi .
The great city was divided into three parts , and the cities of the nations fell . Babylon the great was remembered in the sight of God , to give to her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath . ||| Letlalawan Babel de ema rlihir apieyera la nhiakra wotelu . Me la ' walia leta-leta makden la noheri woru-lyanti nayanni re honona mana , ha rweyata-rwaniaga . Yoma Uplerlawna edon Nhoratdoinia letlalawna Babel pede Nala E lari hankeranni pa Nala la Babel nemnia . Lar die ed mak kodia Uplerlawna yawenan lawanni .
Every island fled away , and the mountains were not found . ||| Noha-rai honona ratniepar wehlihi-radgaur wat muetma me wo'ora-kawur re honona mana emeka ha nhiera-nhiapua .
Great hailstones , about the weight of a talent , came down out of the sky on people . People blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail , for this plague was exceedingly severe . ||| Otan tah ' i muti nwal lia watu hujan es muaka weratni tatia ' u terampwolima ntur pua nwatiawua lyanti pa ntuin la rira o'tani . Rimormiori pala wniohorni-tniatarni la Uplerlawna yoma la ' a otna mak ktur pua kwal lia es matmiat liawan de .
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me , saying , Come here . I will show you the judgment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters , ||| Nhorwua noma la hopopna id la wo'itu mak ktorreria lari re wo'itu nmai pia nakot mai a ' u niwra , Hyalia , mliernohora a ' pua atiutga niukum matmiati la ' a letlawan maka rken tiarga la gerlawna harahu re aratni . Letlalawan de , emolmolan nekama patke ' ida mak khi'inde nalira-naliai liawna .
with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality . Those who dwell in the earth were made drunken with the wine of her sexual immorality . ||| Ray-ray makden la nohkeran di wawannu honona de emolmolan neka rora patke ' de ralira-raliai . Me mak khol lia noha wawannu mana honona re rma'wu , yoma ra'ana-remnia pat mak kalira-kaliai die tgo'oni-arakni .
He carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness . I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored beast , full of blasphemous names , having seven heads and ten horns . ||| Noma Uplerlawna Nhiwni Nodi plolli mai a ' pua hopopan de nod a lia wo'orletna-kawurloini . A'umkek de patke ' yata ida nha ' nana hamormiori id de wullu nmer mutmutni . Ne la inonni de e rhorat targa la ' a-maiya wniohora-tniatra la ' a Uplerlawna nanni . Hamormiori die o'tani wo'itu ne dudallu termida .
The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet , and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls , having in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of the sexual immorality of the earth . ||| Patke ' de nnairia ray rayanni ungu me rain mer mutmutni , me rala leli-maha me watu-watu welli werta kulau nor wutga dirma watnu mutiara ra ralipa-raka'ma nana . La ' limni de e ntorreria lari maha ida de npenpuen lia kdeha-ktiahli maka e inonni welli , me nhioi-tniani uplera-upmati .
And on her forehead a name was written , MYSTERY , BABYLON THE GREAT , THE MOTHER OF THE PROSTITUTES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH . ||| La ' patke ' de reranni de er rtapal targa nana ida mak kodi nnia'eratni mak kayade ' a , de riwra , Babel letlalawna inhatte Mak kwatutu-kwaye ' a riy la ' meni-meni to ' pa ralira-raliai , me kwatutu-kwaye ' a riy la ' meni-meni to ' pa rhi ' a hya'-hya ' to'owa mak kakdeha-kaktiahli , ralira-raliai , rhoi-rtania uplera-upmati .
I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus . When I saw her , I wondered with great amazement . ||| Noma a'umkek patke ' yat de suksukni de nwunu-nwenan lawna Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu mak kakleha do ' a-hala mak kod niohor Yesus lirni-tunnu , pede emeknekama riy mak suksukni de totpa nemun lawna arka la'pa npehera-nma'wu . La'pa a'umkek nana de awuer rer wia'wu .
The angel said to me , Why do you wonder ? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast that carries her , which has the seven heads and the ten horns . ||| Noma hopopan de nakot mai a ' u niwra , Hyalia , nihya'pa o ' ema rtaplelleltaru emkadena ? ! Mai pia a'ukot nohora o la hya ' mak kayade'ela patke ' dena me mak kayade ' wal lia ' hamormiori maka ha nha ' nan de . De hamormiori miaka o'tani wo'itu me dudallu termida .
The beast that you saw was , and is not , and is about to come up out of the abyss and to go into destruction . Those who dwell on the earth and whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world will marvel when they see that the beast was , and is not , and shall be present . ||| Hamormiori die , hade nmormiori lia ululu , mere dodo'ondi de ha nmati olekwa . Hota kekwal die ha nlergot la hu'ul lawna matmiati-molmuolu ralamni . Rimormiori miak kden la noha wawannu , mere nanni edonna rhorat ma'ta la ' a lerni Uplerlawna edonna Nhi ' ma'ta nohkeran di , la puka riy mak kmormiori pia nodi liarni , de hota rheduma la hamormiori die yamkekni . Yoma hamormiori die ululu ed olek la . La ' lera-mela ri de nmolg olekwa , mere hota nahniar owa'ana . Mere hamormior die ho'mana hota nlernana Uplerlawna niukamnu pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni binasa .
Here is the mind that has wisdom . The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits . ||| He ' maka kwarora-kwalai samomuou , de hota nna'erit nana de . Yoma hota o'tani wo'itu re de nnia'eratni de wo'ora mandiditu , maka patke ' de ha namtatan rer lia .
They are seven kings . Five have fallen , the one is , and the other has not yet come . When he comes , he must continue a little while . ||| Ne o'tani re wo'itu de nnia'eratni de ray wo'itu . Hota wolim de rtuini olekwa , ne la id de enod mia'ta plolli . Ne id owa'an de edonna nmai mia'ta . Hota la'pa nmai die , Uplerlawna e Net tiarga oleka pa nodi plolli de edonna nalo'on wali .
The beast that was , and is not , is himself also an eighth , and is of the seven , and he goes to destruction . ||| Ne hamormiori miaka kden olek la noha wawannu nmol mueman la dodo'ondi . Hota e nhi ' ray lia ray mak mandawawni re . Hamormior die ed mak khi ' ray pia nodi plolli de nhiolli-lietni emekwalima ray mandiditu re . Hota ray die , nlernana Uplerlawna niukamnu pa rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni .
The ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have received no kingdom as yet , but they receive authority as kings with the beast for one hour . ||| Dudallu termida maka mumkeka re de ray termida mak edonna kte'la ma'ta la kniarni . Mere hota rala plola-mneha tniorna-riautu la ira pa rodi plolli emekwali hamormior die , pa ror rewre'wa hamormiori die rtorna-rrautu edon nalo'on wali .
These have one mind , and they give their power and authority to the beast . ||| Ray termida ri , honona rla ' lir ida pa honona re rala ruri-lai me tniorna-riautu la hamormiori die .
These will war against the Lamb , and the Lamb will overcome them , for he is Lord of lords and King of kings , and those who are with him are called , chosen , and faithful . ||| Hota ir er maka kwatrom mdudud niana Dum A'na pa rawunu-ra'ara . Mere hota Dum A'na de Nala ir la yawa . Yoma Ray Maktorna-krautu la mak kodi plolli honona la nohkerna-rai miarna etnu-liolli , me Orgahi-Orha ' a la noh marna nora lyanit marna . Ne mak kor rewre'wa E ' a pa rmai , de rimormiori makdenrer setia lia pesiayni la E ' a . Ir er maka Npolga , me ema rwalir nian oleka pa rhi ' a E mutnu .
He said to me , The waters which you saw , where the prostitute sits , are peoples , multitudes , nations , and languages . ||| Ne gerlawna re maka rken tiarga letlawna Babel maka rtot nohora-rpat nohora patke ' yat de , de nnia'eratni de riy honona mak kwatiawua lodna-hairi , noh pa'etu-rai piatatra nora leta-leta ror wut nieka wniareini-wniahaurnu .
The ten horns which you saw , they and the beast will hate the prostitute , will make her desolate , will strip her naked , will eat her flesh , and will burn her utterly with fire . ||| Dudallu termida maka mumkeka re , de ray-ray hare . Ne ror wutga hamormior die rewre'wa pa edon rtelan nana-raut nan owa'an patke ' yatyat de . La ' hade pede hota ir rler teman la patke ' yat de pa reyahru hyonni-hyanni honona , me rhi ' nana de natliawihi . Ne hota rtota inonni pa rlihir matmata-rhaw riarara patke ' de ne rrinnia la ai mormiori ralamni .
For God has put in their hearts to do what he has in mind , to be of one mind , and to give their kingdom to the beast , until the words of God should be accomplished . ||| Yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kal oleka kirkira-ralma-riora la ir wa pa rhi ' emkade . Yoma Enala ralma-rior la ira pa rla ' lira ida pa rotil targa plolli-mneheni tniorna-riautu la hamormior die , totpena enodi plolli . Ne la ' talan emkade pede hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nror targ oleka de hota ntutu-nte'ewa .
The woman whom you saw is the great city which reigns over the kings of the earth . ||| Patke ' maka omumkek de , de hota letlawan mak kodi plolli olek la ' a ray-ray miak kden la nohkerna wawannu inhatte .
After these things , I saw another angel coming down out of the sky , having great authority . The earth was illuminated with his glory . ||| Nhorwua noma a'umkek de hopopna id to ' wal die , nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nernu . Nmai die nodi plolli-ntaryatnu ne hitni-reparni nhi ' nana lodna-hairi la ' noha wawannu leler momuoga .
He cried with a mighty voice , saying , Fallen , fallen is Babylon the great , and she has become a habitation of demons , a prison of every unclean spirit , and a prison of every unclean and hated bird ! ||| Nhaun matmiati pa niwra , Babel , let matmiat liawan de , ntuini lie'enu-nlawra hgerni la hadi wa ! Dodo'ondi de nwal lia hegana-kawnu kukai-kumata puonni . La ' a hande onu-ma'nu maka rmakriarni ne maka rimormiori sukni atia ' la honona rawok taru .
For all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality , the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality with her , and the merchants of the earth grew rich from the abundance of her luxury . ||| Let Babel de , rweyata-rwaniawua yoma nhiolli-lietni illu-wniehwani emolmolan nekama patke ' yatyat ida mak kala arak mikmikri na nhuri ama'wua muanke ' a pa na na'hira re . Emkade walia mak kden letlawna Babel re , rtota makden la hairi-hairi honona pa rhi ' do ' a-ryap hiala me rhoi-rtan lia uplera-upmati . Ray-ray nohkeran di mana ror wutga makden Babel re rhi ' do ' a-ryap hiala pa emolmolan nekama muanke ' a nor pat yatyata ralira-raliai . Ne mak kwadakna re rler la re ' a-tniaru onnila makden Babel re ralamni rapal niana re ' a-tniaru pripanni-fa'anni .
I heard another voice from heaven , saying , Come out of her , my people , that you have no participation in her sins , and that you do n't receive of her plagues , ||| Noma a'utlin walia lira ida nwatiaga Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa niwra , Mak klernohor A ' u mliergot la let matmiat liawan de ralamni . Yana mliernohora makden hande do'oni-halli pa hota mliernan walia niukum lawna .
for her sins have reached to the sky , and God has remembered her iniquities . ||| Yoma do'oni-halli nniutanni tullu la ntut lia lyanti pede dodo'ondi de Awueyata-wuaniawua .
Return to her just as she returned , and repay her double as she did , and according to her works . In the cup which she mixed , mix to her double . ||| Aghopan pa A hopopnu malaikat rhi ' a la makden Babel , de emekwalima makden Babel re rhi ' olek la A mu'tu-rah ' u . Nhiolli-lietni maka rhi ' nana de Agala narehi-nalawna la'pa rti'il nana la woru ralamni hya ' maka rhi ' a-ryapia . Babel niukamnu di emeka lar penpuen lia ha mermueru maka rala la Babel nemnia , wuhurni nareh dioin la maka Babel rala la riy dom to ' a
However much she glorified herself and grew wanton , so much give her of torment and mourning . For she says in her heart , ‘ I sit a queen , and am no widow , and will in no way see mourning . ' ||| Nlernan niukum lawna mana emekwalima e tullu-petanni , me emekneka nmori-ndar lia re ' a-tniaru pripanni-fa'anni wawannu . Yoma patke ' yatyat Babel de nmeh ' a nwaror la ralamni niwra , A ' di de orkotkotni-ornananni id a ' u . Hota a ' g edonna upalu pa ako ' a-ghera .
Therefore in one day her plagues will come , death , mourning , and famine , and she will be utterly burned with fire , for the Lord God who has judged her is strong . ||| La ' hade pede hota la ler id ralamni tutut pua nler la rehka-lara , knio ' a-kniakru lol etnu-liolli , nor wutga matmiati-molmuolu . Ne hota ai mana nlomra mutni-ki'ira la genni . Yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna ed mak kodi plolli . E ' ed mak ketlia do'oni-halli re .
The kings of the earth who committed sexual immorality and lived wantonly with her will weep and wail over her , when they look at the smoke of her burning , ||| Ray-ray makden la nohkerna wawannu , maka kor oleka makden Babel rre ' a-rtaru me rhi ' do ' a-ryap hiala emolmolan nekama muanke ' a nor wutga patke ' yatyata dudu-niei , de hota honona re koko ' a-herera me rapolu-ratnian niohora let maka ai nram doin pa mokalli npupun nan momuoga .
standing far away for the fear of her torment , saying , ‘ Woe , woe , the great city , Babylon , the strong city ! For your judgment has come in one hour . ' ||| Hota honona re rtutrier lia oliet pa rpoi-rkek reria yoma rahala yanhi'pa rlernan niukum de wali . Ray-ray re riwra , Adoo ! Let lawan orkotkotni-ornananni , let mak karuri-kalai , mtatan di nekpa nler la wnieyata-wnianiawu , matmiati-molmuolu mak kamehi-kayona .
The merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her , for no one buys their merchandise any more , ||| Mak kwadakan la noha wawannu mana koko ' a-herera , pa raluli-rahona riwra , Inee ! Hota makden hande id mana hota edon nma naweli it hyonni-hyanni owa'ana ,
merchandise of gold , silver , precious stones , pearls , fine linen , purple , silk , scarlet , all expensive wood , every vessel of ivory , every vessel made of most precious wood , and of brass , and iron , and marble , ||| hota it wuini-krapnu lelli-kdielli , kulau me dirma watnu re ror wut nieka rewni-lawarni mak kamnurnuhru , ungu me mermera maka welli werta , me augalli , ror wut nieka maka rhi ' a la pi'ra , mnotna , onde maka rhi ' a la ora-au welli wierta rora watu liawna mak welli wierat wali ,
and cinnamon , incense , perfume , frankincense , wine , olive oil , fine flour , wheat , cattle , sheep , horses , chariots , and people 's bodies and souls . ||| kayu manis , rampa-rampa , ayalli maka ha ra rtutnia , mur , la'pa anggur turnu , wu'ru saitun , wetra ' ota , metma , me lembu , pipi-duma , kereta nor wutga kuda , me ata-wa'ara . Hare honona hota makden Babel edon raweli owa'ana .
The fruits which your soul lusted after have been lost to you . All things that were dainty and sumptuous have perished from you , and you will find them no more at all . ||| Mak kwadakna re rehela Babel de pa rakot la riwra , Ina-nara makden Babel miy re , miy re'emi-tniarmi , pripanmi-fa'anmi , emolmolan nekama lodan mak kweher doini oleka wa .
The merchants of these things , who were made rich by her , will stand far away for the fear of her torment , weeping and mourning , ||| Mak kwadakan pa kre ' a-ktarg olekwa onnila Babel de raweli ir hyonni-hyanni , de ihranu wolwo'la pa rtutrier lia olietleta , yoma ramta'at la yanhi'pa irlernan walia ira nhiakarni la ' hade . Ir rre ' wal pia rko ' a-rkakru me raluli-rahona .
saying , ‘ Woe , woe , the great city , she who was dressed in fine linen , purple , and scarlet , and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls ! ||| Rhar lirni pa riwra , Adoo ! Let mak kakota-kanan di nhudgaur weee ! Eh ! Emolmolan nekama ray patke'eni pede namrehi-namda'ar nohora hewewatni-naniayarni mak kamnurnuhru , ungu me mermera maka welli werta ror wut nieka leli-maha , watu-watu samomuou muemna me mutiara re .
For in an hour such great riches are made desolate . ' Every ship master , and everyone who sails anywhere , and mariners , and as many as gain their living by sea , stood far away , ||| Mere mtatandi nekpa re'eni-tniarnu pripanni-fa'anni re ema rwatlena . Yurakna honona la kapli , me kapli mniotni honona re mak khopla-klara , makahaka i'na-ya'ana , rtutrier wiutwut lia oliet pa ramkek reria .
and cried out as they looked at the smoke of her burning , saying , ‘ What is like the great city ? ' ||| Honona re polpuolu-hawaunia , yoma ai nram doinia letlawan de . Rhaun pa riwra , Eh ! Maiya nohkeran di de , leta id mana edonna emeka let di !
They cast dust on their heads , and cried , weeping and mourning , saying , ‘ Woe , woe , the great city , in which all who had their ships in the sea were made rich by reason of her great wealth ! ' For she is made desolate in one hour . ||| Noma rhi ' a hya ' ed maka nhi'inde rhi ' a de rkeni awu li'ina la ' ir o'tani totpa rtutga ir ralam mawali yoma raluli-rahon la let de , me rapolu-ratniani . Rkakur pa riwra , Adoo ! Let orkotkotni-ornananni dine ! Omlier nek la yatlorni-yatra'ani . O wulmu-we'elmu ed mak kariei pia orkapli re honona rre ' a-rtaru . Mere mtatan di nekpa ha mutlialawna re emeka ha yattiarmua .
Rejoice over her , O heaven , you saints , apostles , and prophets , for God has judged your judgment on her . ||| Oi ! Ilyamou-Watyatoha nahe ' i-nahepur nohora letlawan de yamdieranni . Hei ! Makodia Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu , me makwohorulu-ktatrulu la'pa miy hononmi mak kla ' olek la Uplerlawna mutnu , mimuki-mihepru . Yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kala niukum lawan de , pa na nawahla makden hande nhiolli-lietni yotyotni-yatyatni maka rhi ' oleka tiy miy wia .
A mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea , saying , Thus with violence will Babylon , the great city , be thrown down , and will be found no more at all . ||| Nhorwua dewade hopopna mak karuri-kalai ida na'ala watu liawna id pa nwa'ala la tah ' i lawna ralamni pa niwra , Emkadilla let Babel maka ha rwetwet la nanni , de hota nodi ruri-lai lia wnia'alli , totpena na nweyata-nwaniaga .
The voice of harpists , minstrels , flute players , and trumpeters will be heard no more at all in you . No craftsman of whatever craft will be found any more at all in you . The sound of a mill will be heard no more at all in you . ||| Preheni-mkaini nho'owa pa he ' i-hepru , tiwla-prai noknoka yetni-warna hota hohoni-hadewa . Ne mak kwewla mnotna me pi'ra la'pa tukna-tukna honona re , hota edon rakoki-rayapi owa'an wa . Edon ratlin owa'ana patke ' a re rtutu'tu watra ' a owa'ana .
The light of a lamp will shine no more at all in you . The voice of the bridegroom and of the bride will be heard no more at all in you , for your merchants were the princes of the earth , for with your sorcery all the nations were deceived . ||| Hota riy edon ramkek owa'ana let de hulu-wa'du hitni-reparni , onde e ratlina mukni-heparnu la ' a mehlima-marya ' a . Hota letlawan de nler la niukum mak emkade , yoma mak kwadakna re mak kdella let de er mak kre ' a-ktaru krehelia nohkeran di , ne makden hande er mak knairia lira-yatu nohkerna pa ra rtot meman makden la hairi-hairi honona pa rler la klieratni .
In her was found the blood of prophets and of saints , and of all who have been slain on the earth . ||| Babel o ' de ro'ona natniutu , me keur lawna narie ' a omlier la niukum lawna yoma o ' ed mak kwunu-kwenna makwohorulu-ktatrulu la'pa Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu korni wali , de riy honona mak edon kpa'eini-kpahal la Uplerlawna ralma-riorni .
After these things I heard something like a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven , saying , Hallelujah ! Salvation , power , and glory belong to our God , ||| La'pa nhorwua noma a'utlin nana hadom yetanni emolmolla mutlialawna ida la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha rhaunu riwra , Haleluya ! Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi it Uplerlawanni la ' a gen tutullu-lolo'oni yoma E ' ed mak kodi plolli . Ita Uplerlawanni de ed mak kamori-kalewn ita . E ' ed mak ktorreria watghudi lokarni me tatiaili lahannu .
for his judgments are true and righteous . For he has judged the great prostitute who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality , and he has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand . ||| Niukum de edon npa'eini-npahala . Eneti olek la niukum lawna la letlalawan de mak ktot nohora patke ' yata ida , mak kor muanke ' a nhi'inde ralira-raliai . Emkade wal lia mak kdella letlalawan de rtot pa nohkerna-raikieran di mniotni rhi ' do ' a-ryap hiala me rhoi-rtan lia uplera-upmati . Uplerlawna Nukmua Babel yoma riy mak kdella let de er mak kwenna Uplerlawna hopopanni Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu .
A second said , Hallelujah ! Her smoke goes up forever and ever . ||| Noma riy rariahu re rhaun pa rakot owa'ana riwra , Haleluya ! Hota ma'uli-mawedi owa'an O la ' a tutulmu-lolo'omu ! Ai miokla mak Omulerun de na'an amutni-aki'ira let matmiat liawan de , ne hota ta'en niana ai die rwarum nana pa nodi liarni .
The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne , saying , Amen ! Hallelujah ! ||| Dewade o'ta-mata riy terampworu wehrani wogata re ror wut nieka hamormiori re wogata ruh ' idma-rrama lia'ar la Uplerlawna mak kamtatna la liwangen tiutullu pa riwra , Amin Haleluya ! Mai pia ta'uli-tawedi Uplerlawna .
A voice came from the throne , saying , Give praise to our God , all you his servants , you who fear him , the small and the great ! ||| Noma lira ida nwatiawu liwangen tutulu de pa niwra , Makpesiay honona mak khima-kre ' a Uplerlawna la'pa kuku'uni-lalawanni , hononmi mak ka'unni-kamta'ata E ' a , de mi'uli-miwedia Uplerlawna la genni-tienni .
I heard something like the voice of a great multitude , and like the voice of many waters , and like the voice of mighty thunders , saying , Hallelujah ! For the Lord our God , the Almighty , reigns ! ||| Nhorwua dewade a'utlin emekneka lir wok lawna ida yetanni emeknekama yo'or lawna , ne anin lawna mak kodia ihini-turnu pa kukru-gauru idma na'it nan ida . A'utlin lirni re riwra , Haleluya ! Ya'uli-yawedi tiy O ' a Uplerlawnu ne , mak kdella tutullu-lolo'oni ! Yoma Omtiorna-mriautu la hanek-harahu wuawannu
Let 's rejoice and be exceedingly glad , and let 's give the glory to him . For the wedding of the Lamb has come , and his wife has made herself ready . ||| Mai pia tamuki-tahepur nohora me ta'uli-tawed E la ' a genni-tienni ! Yoma nte ' olek la lerni-melli maka ha rhoiya la Dum A'na de mehlimni-marya'ani pa rma rawoka wa . Ne Pat Mak kmehlim de e nnairi oleka
It was given to her that she would array herself in bright , pure , fine linen , for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints . ||| hewewta-naniairia mak kamnurnuhru mak kmou-kwitna mak klipa-ka'ma de , maka Uplerlawna Nal oleka la . Naniair de nnia'eratni de nhioli-lieta , ilu-wniehwa mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni mak Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu rhi ' a-ryapi oleka la nohkerna wawannu .
He said to me , Write , ‘ Blessed are those who are invited to the wedding supper of the Lamb . ' He said to me , These are true words of God . ||| Noma hopopan de nakot mai a ' u niwra , Mhuorat targa lira ri , He ' maka klernana polpuolu-wakwaka la Dum A'na mehlimni , de hota ed mak klernana unut lawna . Noma hopopan de na'itr owa'an la lirni mai a ' u niwra , Lir di , de plola yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kakot nana de .
I fell down before his feet to worship him . He said to me , Look ! Do n't do it ! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers who hold the testimony of Jesus . Worship God , for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy . ||| Na'nama awualtior la hopopan de gaini ralamni pa agiwra guh ' idma-riama lia'ara mere nwayotli a ' u , niwra , Yana , yana ! Pen neka mkiola tieru-muawur nehla la Uplerlawna Nmeh ' a . Yoma a ' niek de hopopan to ' a ' u la Uplerlawna , emekwali o ' a me emekwalia o mutwualmu maka kod reria Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Yesus Nakota re . Yoma he ' ed mak kod reria Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Yesus Nakota re , plol toto ' pa ir de emekwali a ' pua am rewre'wa pa makot nohora Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu maka Uplerlawna Nalharia .
I saw the heaven opened , and behold , a white horse , and he who sat on it is called Faithful and True . In righteousness he judges and makes war . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne a'umkek de Ilyamou-Watyatoha ema rhar dioinia ne kud wawahra ida etla rialma . Mak kha ' kud de nwawa riy Mak kdenreri setia me riy Makden la Plol wawna . E ' ed maka khudi-kpara la plol wawannu me edonna nwehwa hal la ar ralma .
His eyes are a flame of fire , and on his head are many crowns . He has names written and a name written which no one knows but he himself . ||| Matni emekneka ai miormiori , ne la o'tani de wutu-lai harahu ranie'era . La inonni de e rhorat targa nan memeh ' a ida , ne hota Enmeh ' a nanpena ed mak kat niohora nnia'eratni .
He is clothed in a garment sprinkled with blood . His name is called The Word of God . ||| Rayanni mak Ennair de , de npenpuen lia ' rara . Ne rweta la Uplerlawna Lira Nnio'oni-Wawa Niatnu .
The armies which are in heaven , clothed in white , pure , fine linen , followed him on white horses . ||| Mak ktorreria keki-rautu re la ' a Ilyamou-Watyatoha rha ' a kud wawahra pa rlernohor reri E ' a , me ema ramrewrehwa la naniairi mak kamnurnuhru wawahra mak momuou .
Out of his mouth proceeds a sharp , double-edged sword that with it he should strike the nations . He will rule them with an iron rod . He treads the wine press of the fierceness of the wrath of God , the Almighty . ||| La ' mak knairia raini npenpuen lia rara de , wawni ralamni de wehla ya'ara ida nlergotgota de namnarnarta . Ne hota wehla mnarnarat de ed mak Nodia pa na Ntipna-nhewra rimormioria noheri woru pa hota Entorna-nrautia de emekneka mak knairia lie'ena mnotna . E ' ed maka kwatei-kwahapra arwalli pa emekwalima riy rwatei-rwahapra anggur wo ' a pa ra rahmia anggur turnu . Emkade pede Ntutga Uplerlawna Makodi plolli pa nodi liarni , hankeranni-ralmha'arni la ' a nohkeran di mniotni onnila do'oni-halli lawan rehia .
He has on his garment and on his thigh a name written , KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS . ||| La ' a rayanni me la ' kowarni de e rhorat targa nan mak emkadi , RAY MAKTORNA-KRAUTU LA MAKODI PLOLLI HONONA LA ' NOHKERNA-RAI MIARNA ETNU-LIOLLI , ME ORGAHI-ORHA ' A LA NOH MARNA NORA LYANIT LAWNA .
I saw an angel standing in the sun . He cried with a loud voice , saying to all the birds that fly in the sky , Come ! Be gathered together to the great supper of God , ||| Noma a'umkek nan walia hopopna ida ntutrier lia lera hititni-repreparni . Nhaun pa nakot la iha re honona mak knema-ktai lia darat lawna niwra , Mai pia mrie'ela mior la Uplerlawna ya'anlawna-yemunlawanni di !
that you may eat the flesh of kings , the flesh of captains , the flesh of mighty men , and the flesh of horses and of those who sit on them , and the flesh of all men , both free and slave , small and great . ||| Mmiai pa mrie'ela mi'ina hare honona mak rarni ktur lia wewna wawannu de ihini-rarni , emekwali ray-ray ri ihini-rarni me mak kodia ahu namni la ar ralma , me riy mak karuri-ka'orta ihini-rarni , me la ' walia mak kha ' a kuda re , me kudni re ihini-rarni , me rimormiori kuku'uni-lalawanni , ata-wa'ara , hopopna-lili'iru me marna-wuhura ihini-rarni .
I saw the beast , the kings of the earth , and their armies , gathered together to make war against him who sat on the horse and against his army . ||| Noma umkek walia hamormior yatyat de mak kmalawan la Uplerlawna nora ray-ray nohkerna ror wutga mak ktorreria ir poka-hidarni rawok pa totpena rtutria Mak kha ' nana kud wawahra de nora mak ktorreria poka-hidarni .
The beast was taken , and with him the false prophet who worked the signs in his sight , with which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped his image . These two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur . ||| Edon nalo'on wali ne Mak kha ' kud wawahra de Ntorna hamormior die nor wut nieka makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak putputra-palpalka de . Makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak putputra-palpalka de , ed mak khi ' oleka hihi ' a-yapyap miaka riy edon ramkek ma'ta pa riy rheduma , totpena rpesiay hamormiori yatyat de . Enhi ' hihi ' a-yapyap mak kamehi-kayona pa nhi'nande nwotra-ntalia riy maka ha rala hamormiori die kniaunu me rru ' u-rtowar la hamormior die atiehrani . Mak kha ' de Ntorna hamormiori die nor wut nieka makwohorulu-ktatrulu mak putputra-palpalak de dewade Enakul mormioria la ai liali maka klomlomra pa klolda .
The rest were killed with the sword of him who sat on the horse , the sword which came out of his mouth . So all the birds were filled with their flesh . ||| Noma Nala wehla ya'ara mak klergot la wawni ralamni de pa na Ntipna-nhewra hare honona mak klernohora hamormior die pa iha re mana ema ruran nana mak ha rwenan nana re ya'anni . Noka ra'an pa rpeher memna .
I saw an angel coming down out of heaven , having the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand . ||| Nhorwua noma a'umkek nana hopopna ida nwatiawua Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nernu . La ' limni de entorreria konsi hu'ul matmiat liawna ralamni , me ntorrer wialia ranti lawna ida .
He seized the dragon , the old serpent , who is the devil and Satan , who deceives the whole inhabited earth , and bound him for a thousand years , ||| Dewade ntorna niy liawan mak kolkuol die , maka rhoiya la Hegana amlawanni onde Setan inhatte , pa ntoran nana na'nama rkenia ranti la limni totpena totpa ta'enniana la ' meni-meni la anni riwnu id ralamni .
and cast him into the abyss , and shut it and sealed it over him , that he should deceive the nations no more until the thousand years were finished . After this , he must be freed for a short time . ||| Noma hopopan de nhawlakrernia niy liawan de la hu'ul matmiat liawan de ralamni . Nhor nioma naslot apitga na'nama nho'la-nwent owa'ana lola tio'ora , totpena niy liawan de yana nodi pudi-akla owa'an la rimormioria nohkerna wawannu . Yoma hota edonna nwo'la-nlekur nana anin tetema riwnu ida . Mere Uplerlawna Neti oleka de la'pa anni riwnu ida nhorwua nanpena rwe'er doinia ranit lawna de pa rala pa nhi ' pudi-akla owa'an oke ' to ' a .
I saw thrones , and they sat on them , and judgment was given to them . I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus and for the word of God , and such as did n't worship the beast nor his image , and did n't receive the mark on their forehead and on their hand . They lived and reigned with Christ for a thousand years . ||| Noma a'umkek de riy ramtatan la liwangen tiutulu mak klernana plolli totpa retlia niukum lawan de . A'umkek nan de riy mak kmati oleka yoma rahmena rwaltiora-rwaltieman la hamormior yatyat de nora uplerni-upmatni , de rmori owa'ana . Ir er mak edon klernan et mia'ta hamormior yatyat de kniau la ' ir limni onde reranni-kiorni . Mere yeher to ' pa rakot nohora Yesus hihi'ini-yapyapni me Uplerlawna lirni-tunnu pa nreiniande rotna tiernu . La ' hade pede irmori owa'ana pa rodi plolli pa emekwalia ray totpa ror rewre'wa Ray Makamori-Kalewna mak Uplerlawna Nano'tarua pa nalo'on nana anni riwnu ida .
The rest of the dead did n't live until the thousand years were finished . This is the first resurrection . ||| Hota emkadella yamori mulaliaini . Mere hota riy dom to ' owa'ana la riy mak kmati re , de edon ramori owa'ana nla ' nana anni riwnu id mahnekni .
Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection . Over these , the second death has no power , but they will be priests of God and of Christ , and will reign with him one thousand years . ||| Mere hota mati maka ramoria la mulaliaini rlernan unut lawne ! Ir er maka Uplerlawna Nwalir niana la ' E gahani . Hota la matmiati re'eni wornu de ir edonna rlernana . Hota ir er mak kla ' o'ta-mata imam mak khima-kre'ela Uplerlawna Nora Yesus Kristus . Ne hota ir wal pia rodi plolli pa emekwalia E ' a la anni riwnu ida .
And after the thousand years , Satan will be released from his prison ||| La'pa mahnekni mana anni riwnu ida , dewade hegana amlawanni mana rwe'er doinia la hu'ul matmiat liawna ralamni de .
and he will come out to deceive the nations which are in the four corners of the earth , Gog and Magog , to gather them together to the war , whose number is as the sand of the sea . ||| Ne hota la nputra-npalak targho'ola rimormiori makden la hairi-hairi , la noheri-woru lyanti nayanni maka rweta la Gog , me Magog . Hegan de nalahar nan ntargho'ola rpa nawoka-nale'ga re pa totpena rma ra'ara . Maka ha nawoka-nale ' niana re , de emek en liu'wu-tan miakmu .
They went up over the width of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city . Fire came down out of heaven from God and devoured them . ||| Hota rwatiawu nohkerna-rai miarna uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani pa rma rle'ga likti-lar maka Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu ha rdella de , de let maka Uplerlawna Nhilpai-nmanatu de . Mere hota lyanti nalernia ai mormiori pa na nlomar wenwenan momuoga re .
The devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur , where the beast and the false prophet are also . They will be tormented day and night forever and ever . ||| Ne hota hegana amlawanni mak ka'ohpa-kalahara hare de hota rrinnia la ai liali mak klomlomar pa klolda . La gen die ed maka rnakul targ ulga hamormior die nora makwohorulu-ktatrulu putputra-palpalak della . Rnahora-rnala ' a ir la gen die pa nodi liarni .
I saw a great white throne and him who sat on it , from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away . There was found no place for them . ||| Nhor nioma a'umkek nana liwangen tiutulu wo ' a wahra ida , de E ' ed maka kaliwna la liwangen tutul die . Lyanti me nohkerna mana ta'en niana ndella E matni nayanni pede nmol tietema .
I saw the dead , the great and the small , standing before the throne , and they opened books . Another book was opened , which is the book of life . The dead were judged out of the things which were written in the books , according to their works . ||| Ne a'umkek de mati-molu kuku'uni-lalawanni raprir pia rpepan reria liwangen tutul die gaini ralamni . Noma puk ke ' a-puk lawna re honona de rawnial momuou . Noma puka id to ' a de puka riy mak kmormiori pa nodi liarni . Dewade retlia mak kmati re niukamnu edonna npa'eini-npahal et mieman la maka ha rhi ' nana , yoma er momuou lia puka re ralamni .
The sea gave up the dead who were in it . Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them . They were judged , each one according to his works . ||| Noma la tah ' i lawna mana nal walia riy maka e nlumu-ntelan nan oleka re . Maka'ala riy aranni Matmiati nora Noh mati-rai miolu mana ral walia mati-molu re . Ne mati-molu re honona mana retlia ira niukamnu de edonna npa'eini-npahal la ' a hya ' maka irhi ' a-ryapi oleka wa .
Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire . This is the second death , the lake of fire . ||| Nhorwua noma Maka'ala riy aranni nor wutga Noh mati-rai molu mana rrinnia la ai miormiori ralamni . Ai miormiori liawna di de rrekan nana la matmiati re'eni wornu .
If anyone was not found written in the book of life , he was cast into the lake of fire . ||| Riy maka nanni edonna rhorat targa la puka riy mak kmormiori pia nodi liarni , de hota rrinnia momuoga la ai mormiori ralamni .
I saw a new heaven and a new earth , for the first heaven and the first earth have passed away , and the sea is no more . ||| La ' noma a'umkek nan walia lyanit warwuaru nora noh warwuaru . Lyanti nora nohkeran mak kala ' ul muemna ema rmol tietema , me la ' walia tah ' i lawna mana edon tamkek nan walia .
I saw the holy city , New Jerusalem , coming down out of heaven from God , prepared like a bride adorned for her husband . ||| La'pa a'umkek de Let mak kmou-kwitna , mak kakleh do ' a-hal de maka rweta la Yerusalem Warwuaru , ema rhuriernia la Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nerun la yawa , yoma Uplerlawna ed mak kal hade . Let de liplipa-kamka'ma nohora Uplerlawna tutullu-lolo'oni pa emolmolla patke ' a maka ralipa-raka'ma pa hota ramehlim wutga la a'na muanke ' a ida .
I heard a loud voice out of heaven saying , Behold , God 's dwelling is with people , and he will dwell with them , and they will be his people , and God himself will be with them as their God . ||| Noma a'utlin de lir lawna ida nwatiaga liwangen tiutul pa niwra , Mitlina ! Dodo'ondi de Uplerlawna genni mana nden wut lia rimormiori ha rden la . Hota Enhi ' a ir la E mutnu-rahanu pa Nora re rden wut lia geni-tiena ida . Uplerlawna Nden wut lia ira , ne ir mana rkola tieru-rawur nehla rer lia E ' a .
He will wipe away every tear from their eyes . Death will be no more , neither will there be mourning , nor crying , nor pain any more . The first things have passed away . ||| Ne E ' ed maka knah ir luini-nuhranu la ir gaini . Matmiati-molmuolu , ralam mawla , lui-nuhru onde mehra-mau mana edon olekwa . Yoma hya ' maka tamkeka me ta'eram nana la ulul geni re , de edon olekwa .
He who sits on the throne said , Behold , I am making all things new . He said , Write , for these words of God are faithful and true . ||| Dewade Mak kamtatan la liwangen tutul die niwra , Mitlina ! Dodo'ondi de Aghi ' a hare honona de warwuaru momuoga . Enakot wal mai a ' u , niwra , Mhuorta hadi , yoma lira-tunu ri de ha plollola re , ne hota hare er maka riy rpesiaya .
He said to me , I am the Alpha and the Omega , the Beginning and the End . I will give freely to him who is thirsty from the spring of the water of life . ||| Me Nakot wali , Dodo'ondi memna Aghi ' ahorga hare honona mak Awuaror taru oleka wa ! A ' g ed maka ha rweta la Alpa nor Omega , yoma A ' g ed mak kala ' ulu me A ' wual pia ed mak kden la li'iru . La ' he ' a-he ' to ' maka tiernu kerna , de hota A ' g ed maka katera-kalahga nora ger ormata mak kodia miormiori-dardiari plalahwa pa edon ntutu-nte ' a . Ger di de Agal neka la he'-he ' mak kwahaka . A ' g edon u'olu hadi .
He who overcomes , I will give him these things . I will be his God , and he will be my son . ||| Riy mak ka'untu la hegana amlawanni yoma edonna rhoitio'or doin ir pesiayni mai A ' u mere rkol reri pitpit lia , hota A ' g ed mak kala A ra ' u-pa'lu mak A'ukottaru ri honona la ira . Ne A ' g ed mak khi ' Uplerlawan la ira . Ne irpolg A ' die ir Amni .
But for the cowardly , unbelieving , sinners , abominable , murderers , sexually immoral , sorcerers , idolaters , and all liars , their part is in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur , which is the second death . ||| Mere mak kho'ola li'iru , mak edon kpesiay , mak khi ' do ' a-kyap hiala kdeha-ktiahli , makwunu-makwenna , mak kalira-kaliai , mak knairia lira-yatga nohkerna , mak kru ' u-ktowar la uplera-upmati , me riy mak ka'ohpa-kalahara , de hota rrinnia la ai lali mormiori mak klomlomra pa klolda , de la matmiati-molmuolu maka rweta la matmiati-molmuolu re'eni wornu .
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls which were loaded with the seven last plagues came , and he spoke with me , saying , Come here . I will show you the bride , the Lamb 's wife . ||| Riy ida la ' a hopopna re wo'itu mak ktorreria lari niemun geni mak kpenpuen lia Uplerlawna niukamnu re wo'itu mak ktawli'iru , nmai pia nakot mai a ' u niwra , Mai pia atiutga patke ' maka riwra ramehlima la ' a Dum A'na de .
He carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain , and showed me the holy city , Jerusalem , coming down out of heaven from God , ||| Dewade Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli mana Nodi plolli mai a ' pua hopopan de nod a lia wo'or tutulu id hananni . Entut a lia Yerusalem , Uplerlawna letni de , nwatiawu Ilyamou-Watyatoha pa nernu , Uplerlawna ed mak kal hade .
having the glory of God . Her light was like a most precious stone , like a jasper stone , clear as crystal , ||| A'umkek de let de liplipa-kamka'ma yoma Uplerlawna hitni-reparni ndain nana . Me homarni-layarni emekneka watu welli werta , de namrehi-namda'ar la watga baiduri pandan , yamkekni namememi emekneka watu liplipa .
having a great and high wall with twelve gates , and at the gates twelve angels , and names written on them , which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel . ||| Lutarnu mana rwadialaw nana nadadna pa natulu me puohrani termida wehrani woru . Ne la puohrani re mana Uplerlawna hopopanni-lili'irnu rhapet reria nenenna . La ' puohra re honona de e rhorat targa Israela duratni termida wehrani woru re nanni .
On the east were three gates , and on the north three gates , and on the south three gates , and on the west three gates . ||| La anni matni re honona de puohra lawna wotel muana rapal tiarg oleka re . Wotel die rapal lia tipru , wotel die ra ' i , wotel die tranna , me wotel die warta .
The wall of the city had twelve foundations , and on them twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb . ||| Lutur let de e rwatatga la watu liar pianulu termida wehrani woru . La watu liar pianulu re de , de e rhorat targa la riy termida wehrani woru re nanni maka rhopan pa rodia Dum A'na de lirni-tunnu .
He who spoke with me had for a measure a golden reed to measure the city , its gates , and its walls . ||| Hopopan mak kmai a ' die ntorreria lie'ena maha , maka nnairia pa na nlewta let de uhunu-ewatni nor wutga puohrani me lutarnu .
The city is square . Its length is as great as its width . He measured the city with the reed , twelve thousand twelve stadia . Its length , width , and height are equal . ||| Let de nnairia ewatni-lahwani wogata re . Lahwani emekwalima ewatni . Dewade hopopan de nlewta let de nnairia lie'enni de , noma nlernana lahwani , ewatni , nora tullu de stadia riwnu termida wehrani woru 2 , 400 kilu .
Its wall is one hundred forty-four cubits , by the measure of a man , that is , of an angel . ||| La'pa hopopan de nlewta lutur lawan de kpaunu , de nlernana kpaunu de elu rahu ida terampwogata wehrani wogata 60 meter . Liewat maka hopopan de nnairia , de emekwalima liewat maka rimormiori ha rnairia la ' lera-lera .
The construction of its wall was jasper . The city was pure gold , like pure glass . ||| Rhi ' a lutur de , de rnairia watu baiduri pandan , mere la'pa leta tetema de rnairia mah ihi mak kamememi pa liplipa-kamka'ma me momo ' a-marmara .
The foundations of the city 's wall were adorned with all kinds of precious stones . The first foundation was jasper , the second sapphire , the third chalcedony , the fourth emerald , ||| Watu liar pianulu termida wehrani woru la let de , de ramrehi-ramda'ar nohora watu-watu mak weli werweratni . De watu liar pianulu de rnairia watu motmota mak kwawa baiduri pandan , wornu de rnairia watu motmota mak kwawa nilam , wotellu de rnairia watu motmota mak kwawa yakut . Wogatni de rnairia watu motmota mak kwawa samrud .
the fifth sardonyx , the sixth sardius , the seventh chrysolite , the eighth beryl , the ninth topaz , the tenth chrysoprase , the eleventh jacinth , and the twelfth amethyst . ||| Wolimni de rnairia watu mermera na'itra wawahra mak kwawa baiduri sepah , wonemni de rnairia watu mermera mak kwawa delima , wo'itnu de rnairia watu marmara mak kwawa ratna cempaka , wo'awni de rnairia watu motmota mak kwawa pitus , wosiewni de rnairia watu marmara mak kwawa topas , termidni de rnairia watu motmota mak kwawa krisopras , termida wehrani idni de rnairia watu motmota mak kwawa lasuardi , me la ' a termida wehrani wornu de rnairia watu ungu mak kwawa kecubung .
The twelve gates were twelve pearls . Each one of the gates was made of one pearl . The street of the city was pure gold , like transparent glass . ||| Puohra lawna termida wehrani woru re de , rnairia mutiara id la puohra nenenna . La let de talan lawanni de rnairia maha ihini mak kamememi pa liplipa-kamka'ma me momo ' a-marmara .
I saw no temple in it , for the Lord God the Almighty and the Lamb are its temple . ||| A ' g edonna umkek nana roma-krei la let de ralamni , yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu Makodi plolli E inhatte Nmeh ' a nor wutga Dum A'na de Nwauga roma-krei die .
The city has no need for the sun or moon to shine , for the very glory of God illuminated it and its lamp is the Lamb . ||| La let de edon rwahaka lera-wolla lairni yoma Uplerlawna preheni-mkaini hitita-lomlomr oleka la let de . Ne Dum A'na de Nlipa-nka'ma pa Nwauga wa'du mormiori .
The nations will walk in its light . The kings of the earth bring the glory and honor of the nations into it . ||| Rimormiori nohkeran di hota rala ' lola lelerni ralamni , ne ray-ray mana rodia re'eni-tniarnu pa rmai wia let de ralamni totpa rala ra rhi ' a la limtutnu .
Its gates will in no way be shut by day for there will be no night there , ||| Let de puohrani hota nahniaria lelera . Me edonna rho'la targa re yoma la ' hande de melmela hadamonna .
and they shall bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it so that they may enter . ||| Noheri woru re'eni-tniarnu re me mak khi ' ir pa ratulu-rapetna re , hota rod miomuoga la let de ralamni pa rhi ' a la limtutnu totpena rhu'ru-rhelam la Uplerlawna .
There will in no way enter into it anything profane , or one who causes an abomination or a lie , but only those who are written in the Lamb 's book of life . ||| Mere la'pa rimormior miaka khi ' a-kyapia do ' a-hala kdeheni-ktiahlani onde maka rhoi-rtan lia uplera-upmati , la'pa mak kputra-kpalka , de edonna ror la ' a let de ralamni . Mere eneknek to'ama riy maka ha rhorat tar nanni la puka riy mak kmormiori pa nodi liarni .
He showed me a river of water of life , clear as crystal , proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb , ||| Hopopan de ntut wualia gerlawna mak kodia mormiori-dardiari , mai a ' u . Gerlawna mak kamememi pa itamkek de nlipa-nka'ma pa emeka wat mi'na , de nwatiawua Uplerlawna nor Dum A'na de liwangen tiutullu pa nwau
in the middle of its street . On this side of the river and on that was the tree of life , bearing twelve kinds of fruits , yielding its fruit every month . The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations . ||| liola talan lawna letgarni la let de ralamni . La gerlawan de aratni walli-walli , ora-au mak kawo ' nana orwo ' a-auwo ' a mak kodi mormiori-dardiari . Au die nawo'ola anni ida , de nawo ' nana re'eni termida wehrani woru , pede wolla-wolla nenenna de rlernana wo'oni . Au die tawni de rnairia la koda-atiawi la rimormior nohkerna wawannu .
There will be no curse any more . The throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it , and his servants will serve him . ||| La let de ralamni de it edonna tlernana hya ' maka Uplerlawna Nhorghala-nwaghala . Uplerlawna nora Dum A'na de liwangenni-mtatangenni ed mak kawniau lia let de letgarni . Ne Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu makpesiay re hota rhima-rre ' rer lia E ' a .
They will see his face , and his name will be on their foreheads . ||| Ne hota ramkek meman la E gaini ralamni . Ne rhorat targa E nanni la hare reranni .
There will be no night , and they need no lamp light or sun light , for the Lord God will illuminate them . They will reign forever and ever . ||| La ' ler de edonna rtutin wa'du , me lera mana edonna nhita-nrepra yoma melmela hadamonan la hande , yoma Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna ed mak khita-krepar la hande . Hota Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu re er mak kre'ela pa rodi plolli wal pia nodi liarni .
He said to me , These words are faithful and true . The Lord God of the spirits of the prophets sent his angel to show to his bondservants the things which must happen soon . ||| Dewade hopopan de nakot mai a ' u niwra , Lira-tunu maka ha rakot nohora la yamkekmu di ralamni de raplol momuou ne hota riy rpesiaya . Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu maka Nhiw Lululli Nodi plolli la makwohorulu-ktatrulu nabi pede rwohorulu-rtatrulu , ed maka Nhopan doinia hopopanni malaikat pa nma ntutga la mak khima-kre ' a E kniarni la ' a hya ' mak hota kler pa kmai wia .
Behold , I am coming soon ! Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book . ||| Yesus Nakota de , Mpiaror kalwiedwed hari ! Hota A ' g ed mak kler pa kmai wia . He ' ed mak klernohora hya ' maka ha rakot targa la Puk di ralamni de , hota ler la unut lawna .
Now I , John , am the one who heard and saw these things . When I heard and saw , I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel who had shown me these things . ||| Yohansi a ' u ed mak katlina la a tli'nu me mak kamkek memna la a ma'tu di . La'pa hare honona de aliernana la hopopan de dewade ariu ' u lia yaw pa atiuk lia me agiwa ghu'ru-ghelam la hopopan de
He said to me , You must not do that ! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers , the prophets , and with those who keep the words of this book . Worship God . ||| mere nakot mai a ' u , Yana mhu'ru mai a ' u , mere mhu'ru la Uplerlawna . Yoma a ' niek de , E ' ed mak khopn a ' u pa emekwalia omuora inmu-narmu ammu-hyalmu makwohorulu-ktatrulu , me riy honona mak katlina-katailla lira-tunu la ' Puk di ralamni .
He said to me , Do n't seal up the words of the prophecy of this book , for the time is at hand . ||| Ne a'ukot tiy o ' de , Yan memmemna muwunmua lira-tun muaka ha rakot targa la Puk di ralamni . Yoma hota lerni-melli la mak ha rakot taru ri nler pa nmai wia .
He who acts unjustly , let him act unjustly still . He who is filthy , let him be filthy still . He who is righteous , let him do righteousness still . He who is holy , let him be holy still . ||| Riy mak kler la yatyatni-halalli , me mak kru ' u-ktowar la uplera-upmati , de plolli nek la ir wa . Mere riy mak khi ' a hya ' mak kaplol la Uplerlawna yamkekni me riy mak kakleha do ' a-hala mhi ' emkade pa nodi liarni .
Behold , I am coming soon ! My reward is with me , to repay to each man according to his work . ||| Mpiahniorta Yesus lirni hadi , Hota edon nalo'on wali ne Amuai , ne Agodia siewa-kai pa Agala wuahla rimormiori hihi'ini-yapyapni . Siewa-kai die nlernohora hya ' maka ha rhi ' nan oleka wa .
I am the Alpha and the Omega , the First and the Last , the Beginning and the End . ||| A ' di de ed mak ha rweta la Alpa nor Omega yoma A ' g ed mak kden ulu , me A ' wual pia ed mak ktawli'iru .
Blessed are those who do his commandments , that they may have the right to the tree of life , and may enter in by the gates into the city . ||| Unut lawna nden la riy mak kpo ' a-kpah'ia rainia plalahwani pa nmou-nwitna yoma hota ir er mak klola puohra leta la rialma pa rlernana orwo ' a-auwo ' a mak kodia mormiori-dardiar die .
Outside are the dogs , the sorcerers , the sexually immoral , the murderers , the idolaters , and everyone who loves and practices falsehood . ||| Mere riy mak kwehwa-klakta kdeheni-ktiahlani , me mak kpesiaya lira-yatga nohkerna , me mak kalira-kaliai , mak kwunu-kwenna , mak kru ' u-ktowar la uplera-upmati , mak ka'ohpa-kalahara la'pa mak kakota lol nurnu onde wniehwani ntutga , de ir honona rden la let de to'orni .
I , Jesus , have sent my angel to testify these things to you for the assemblies . I am the root and the offspring of David , the Bright and Morning Star . ||| Yesus A ' g inhatti . A ' u'enyatg oleka A hopopnu totpena nodia lira ri tiy miy pa miala la krei-krei re honona . A ' di de ray Daud duratni-waitni A ' u . Wtion mak kreprepar la tipru A ' g inhatti .
The Spirit and the bride say , Come ! He who hears , let him say , Come ! He who is thirsty , let him come . He who desires , let him take the water of life freely . ||| Uplerlawna Nhiw Lululli , me Pat Mak kmehlima nakot walia , Mmiai wia ! Mak katlin ho ' hadi mana niwra , Mmiai wia ! He ' ed maka tiernu kerna , de mlier pa mmiai wia . Ne he ' ed maka ralamni kwahak pa nemun de mtipua ger mak kodia mormiori-lewlewan de pa miemnia de plolli nek la miy nniemanmi .
I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book , if anyone adds to them , God will add to him the plagues which are written in this book . ||| Mhioratreria me ! La'pa he ' to ' a mak katlin oleka lira-tunu mak aghorat targa ri , de yana mi'itra-milawan la . Yoma he ' na'itra , de hota Uplerlawna ed mak ka'itar la niukamnu la ' a nala mehra-mau liawna maka rakot oleka la puk di ralamni .
If anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy , God will take away his part from the tree of life , and out of the holy city , which are written in this book . ||| Ne la'pa he ' ed maka kteti akpuri-akdahia hya ' maka rakot targa la puk di , de hota Uplerlawna edonna Nala e nhiakarni la maka rakot targa la puk di ralamni , de la nhiakra orwo ' a-auwo ' a mormiori die me la let mak kmou-kwitan la do ' a-hala wawannu de .
He who testifies these things says , Yes , I am coming soon . Amen ! Yes , come , Lord Jesus ! ||| E ' maka kakot nohora hare honona re plollolli , ed mak kiwra , Plola pa Alier pa Amuai wia . Ne Yohansi a'ukot walia , Plola , Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Mmuai wia .
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints . Amen . ||| Awuak de Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus pena Nala ra'ani-pallu la ' a Uplerlawna mutnu-rahanu honona . Amin Plola . A kalwie'du , Yohansi
In the days when the judges judged , there was a famine in the land . A certain man of Bethlehem Judah went to live in the country of Moab with his wife and his two sons . The name of the man was Elimelech , and the name of his wife Naomi . The names of his two sons were Mahlon and Chilion , Ephrathites of Bethlehem Judah . They came into the country of Moab and lived there . ||| La ' ululu ma'ta , la ' ler maka maktorna deulu-tatra rodi plolli la Israel , de rehka-lar lawna la ' hande . La ' ler de de a'na muanke ' id nanni Elimelek nor patke'eni nanni Naomi rwatiawua luwu-a'na Efrata . Ira nhiol genni Betlehem la ' a riy Yehuda yapatni . Yoma la ' a rehka-lar lawan de pede nora patke'eni Naomi rla'awa la Moab rora a'nani rora , Mahlon nora Kilion pa honona rden la hande .
Elimelech , Naomi 's husband , died , and she was left with her two sons . ||| Noma lera ida ne Na'omi muanke'eni Elimelek nmat wia . Pa enekneka Na'omi napatyat nohora a'nani muanke ' a rora la hande .
They took for themselves wives of the women of Moab . The name of the one was Orpah , and the name of the other was Ruth . They lived there about ten years . ||| A'nani re rmehlim pa rora pat harara makden la Moab de , ida nwawa Orpa , me ida nwawa Rut . La'pa edon nhal de , nalo'on nana anni termid wa la hande
Mahlon and Chilion both died , and the woman was bereaved of her two children and of her husband . ||| dewade Na'omi a'nani muanke ' a rora rmat wial wia . Ne Na'omi napatyata inon muanmuanu .
Then she arose with her daughters-in-law , that she might return from the country of Moab , for she had heard in the country of Moab how the LORD had visited his people in giving them bread . ||| Rden la hande pa lera ida ne Na'omi natlin nana ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Ntera-ndem oleka riy Israel la ' a riekni-wnio'orani . Dewade Na'omi nora yananni patke ' a rora rwahi ' a-rwayod pia rlergot la ' Moab totpa rawal lia Israel .
She went out of the place where she was , and her two daughters-in-law with her . They went on the way to return to the land of Judah . ||| Irlergot rewre'wa pa rawal lia ' Yehuda yapatni . La ' pa ralala ' rer mia'ta
Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law , Go , return each of you to her mother 's house . May the LORD deal kindly with you , as you have dealt with the dead and with me . ||| noma Na'omi nakot la yananni patke ' a rora niwra , Yananmi re ! Samomuounu de mimrio ' miwal lia miy inmi romni . Pena awuak la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A pa Ntutga E ralam kalwiedni tiy miy , emeknekama mtiutg oleka la miy hapmi mak kmati oleka re me mimtiutg oleka la mai a ' u .
May the LORD grant you that you may find rest , each of you in the house of her husband . Then she kissed them , and they lifted up their voices , and wept . ||| Pena wuak la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A totpa Nal miy pia mmiehlim owa'ana , totpena mimlier owa'an la mtierterannu . La'pa Na'omi nano ' a rpa nhorwua dewade nkinnia re pa niwra nawliohorwa dewade rolindoinia kniakru
They said to her , No , but we will return with you to your people . ||| pa rakot la yananni Na'omi riwra , Yannie ! Omliol meni-meni pa muwal wia nohomu de , amlernohorre'ru pa ita tden wut lia o lupmu-a'namu de .
Naomi said , Go back , my daughters . Why do you want to go with me ? Do I still have sons in my womb , that they may be your husbands ? ||| Mere rora yananni Na'omi nhar lirni nakot la niwra , A'nami re ! Samomuounu de mimrio ' miwal lia rommi . Nihya ' pede miwra mliernohora a ' u ? A'ukleha upa-a'na , pa hota mimiora mmiehlim owa'ana . Ne hota a ' g edonna liernan owa'an a'na .
Go back , my daughters , go your way , for I am too old to have a husband . If I should say , ‘ I have hope , ' if I should even have a husband tonight , and should also bear sons , ||| Pede a'na miy re , mimrio ' a miwal niek la inmi romni . A ' di de ghape'ewa pa hota he ' ed mak kor a pua mmehlim owa'ana totpena aliernan a'na ? ! Ne la'pa emkade ho'mana aliernan talan pa agor muanke ' id mmehlim la ' mel di memna , totpa pleta-plet pa aliernan a'na muanke ' a rora ,
would you then wait until they were grown ? Would you then refrain from having husbands ? No , my daughters , for it grieves me seriously for your sakes , for the LORD 's hand has gone out against me . ||| de plol toto ' a de mimpiei niana keke'enku ' a re rlawan totpena miora mmiehlima ? ! Hota a ' a'nu nanpena mimiora mmiehlima ne la ' riy dom to ' a de taken niana miora mmiehlima ? ! Yan mimrio ' a mpiaror emkare ! A'na miy re , mimrio ' miwal niek wa yoma ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Ntutga hankeranni mai a ' pua mernu-kapalli maka aliernan dena nareh dioin hya ' maka mimliernana .
They lifted up their voices and wept again , then Orpah kissed her mother-in-law , but Ruth stayed with her . ||| Noma rpolpuolu-kakakria , dewade Orpa nkinnia yananni na'nama nwak kalwieda pa nla'awa . Mere yananni handina Rut de nkorreri pitpit lia Na'omi pa nahmena nwadur nan oke ' a .
She said , Behold , your sister-in-law has gone back to her people and to her god . Follow your sister-in-law . ||| Na'omi nakot la niwra , Ruta ! Mumkek to'ola raurmu nla ' olekwa de pa hota nler wut lia lupwalli-a'na walli re pa rkola tieru-rawur nehla la uplerni-upmatni re wa nee ! Mlia ' pa mliernohora raurmu e nla ' olek de !
Ruth said , Do n't urge me to leave you , and to return from following you , for where you go , I will go , and where you stay , I will stay . Your people will be my people , and your God my God . ||| Mere Ruta nahmena ne niwra , Yanie , yana mhuopn alia'awa pa atio'or doinia o ' la . Hota omliol meni to ' de alier nohorre'ru ! La'pa omdiella hanmeni de adiel wal lia pa la'pa amuat nioho'ru la hande . O lupmu-a'namu erla hanmeni de alier wut lia . Uplerlawna maka omkuola tieru-muawur nehla la de a ' muana kola tieru-gawur nehla wal lia .
Where you die , I will die , and there I will be buried . May the LORD do so to me , and more also , if anything but death parts you and me . ||| Ommuori-mmuat lia hanmeni , de amuori-muat nioho'ru pa rtamin wali a lia ' hande . La'pa a'uwlar dioinia o la de pena Uplerlawna Nal a lia yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani . Ommuati onde amuat nianpena itro ' idma oliet la ida !
When Naomi saw that she was determined to go with her , she stopped urging her . ||| La'pa Na'omi nat niohora hota Rut nahmen memna nlernohora e lirni dewade edon nakot owa'an pa rpahakar talla .
So they both went until they came to Bethlehem . When they had come to Bethlehem , all the city was excited about them , and they asked , Is this Naomi ? ||| Rrora rla'awa pa rodi liarni la Betlehem . La'pa rte'ewa la hande , de let de ralamni kokan nohora-po'on nohora la Na'omi . Hapepe ' a-hararara let mniotni idma natian id la riwra , Mak ha riwra Na'omi inhati hadina ?
She said to them , Do n't call me Naomi . Call me Mara , for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me . ||| Noma Na'omi e nhar lirni pa nwalola re niwra , In-el miy ree ! Yan mpiet a lia Na'omi nnia'eratni de nahepru . Mere mpiolga a na'nu la Mara nnia'eratni de mernu-kapalli yoma Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu makodi plolli Nhur dioinia a lia pa alier la mernu-kapalli .
I went out full , and the LORD has brought me home again empty . Why do you call me Naomi , since the LORD has testified against me , and the Almighty has afflicted me ? ||| La ' lerni aliergot la handi pa alia'awa la ' a Moab de agod miemna-gal memna . Mere ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Npolla-nwe'era alia la ' a noh maka a ra'ru ntur lia di agodi hgalia a li'mu . La ' hade pede yana mpiolga a lia Na'omi nahepru yoma ORGAHI-ORHA ' A mak kodi plolli ktaryatlia la ' a hanek-harahu wuawannu ed mak kto'on reri a ' pua muori-diar lia kropanni-krieutnu !
So Naomi returned , and Ruth the Moabitess , her daughter-in-law , with her , who returned out of the country of Moab . They came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley harvest . ||| Emkadel la ' a Na'omi tuini la ' lera nwatiawua Moab pa nawal niohora yananni Ruta , riy Moab de . La ' lera rte'ela la ' a Betlehem de , de rlernana mdududga rieik lawna la noha wullu-we'elli .
Naomi had a relative of her husband 's , a mighty man of wealth , of the family of Elimelech , and his name was Boaz . ||| Na'omi hawni Elimelek mak kmati oleka de , rimormiorni ida nwawa Bo'as , maka nh'inde riy ra'unni-ramta'ata yoma la ' a re'eni-tniarnu .
Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi , Let me now go to the field , and glean among the ears of grain after him in whose sight I find favor . She said to her , Go , my daughter . ||| Noma la'awa lera id na'nama Rut makden Moab de nakot la Na'omi niwra , Awuak pa alia teka nhyi ' ralma totpena arie'ela uwoka wetra ' lawna harni maka riy rtetia pa ktuini . Pena alia uwoka wetra ' lawan de la ' gen mieni maka riy e rsaini a pua edonna rwayotlia a lia hande . Noma Ruta wniakni de , yananni Na'omi nreiniana pa nhopna nla ' a .
She went , and came and gleaned in the field after the reapers , and she happened to come to the portion of the field belonging to Boaz , who was of the family of Elimelech . ||| Dewade Ruta nla ' a nhyi ' ralam id pa nawoka wetra ' lawna harni maka mak kreiki-kwo'ora rhi ' atuinia . La ' a nhyi ' maka ha nla nawoka wetra ' lawna har la de , Elimelek hyalli Bo'as de gahani , mere Rut naplin niohora de .
Behold , Boaz came from Bethlehem , and said to the reapers , May the LORD be with you . They answered him , May the LORD bless you . ||| La'pa lardoinia jam ida-woru dewade Bo'as nwatiawua Betlehem pa nmai wia noma nwak kalwieda la makreiki-kwo'ora re niwra , Awuak pa ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nor miy tialla . Noma rwak walia kalwieda la Bo'as ora nhyi ' de riwra , Ne ampak wal pia ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Ntera-ndem o ' a .
Then Boaz said to his servant who was set over the reapers , Whose young lady is this ? ||| Noma Bo'as natian nohora Rut la ' a makhi ' o'tani la mak kreiki-kwo'ora re niwra , Hararar de ha nwatiawua he ' genni-tienni luwnu-a'nani ?
The servant who was set over the reapers answered , It is the Moabite lady who came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab . ||| Noma o'tani de nwalolla niwra , Pat Moab id hadi ! Na'nama ha nora Na'om pia rwatiawu Moab pa rmai .
She said , ‘ Please let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves . ' So she came , and has continued even from the morning until now , except that she rested a little in the house . ||| Ha nwak ma ' u pua nre'ela natopla wetra ' lawna harni maka mak kreiki-kwo'ora rtolkiai yeti re , la ' a wetra ' lawna mak ha ra niutin taru oleka re onni ! Ha natopal nek la yawyawar pa na'nama nren la hoiwial die nayanni .
Then Boaz said to Ruth , Listen , my daughter . Do n't go to glean in another field , and do n't go from here , but stay here close to my maidens . Let your eyes be on the field that they reap , and go after them . Have n't I commanded the young men not to touch you ? When you are thirsty , go to the vessels , and drink from that which the young men have drawn . ||| Noma Bo'as nla ' pa nakot la Ruta niwra , Nara , mitlina ! Yana mlia mutopla riy meheni dom to ' a wetra ' lawna harni , mere mlia mutopla la gen miaka mumkek nan de a'na muanke ' a mak kar lia handi e rreiki-rwo'ora . Ne pena muor wutga a'na pat mak kar lia handi pa muliria mak ktuini re . Irlol meni-meni de mliernohor reria re . La'pa o tiermu kerna , de muemun nek la ' a kekna maka a'na muanke ' a mak kar die rhi'targ oleka re wa . A'ukot olek la ir pa yana muanke ' ida nkakrom o ' a .
Then she fell on her face and bowed herself to the ground , and said to him , Why have I found favor in your sight , that you should take knowledge of me , since I am a foreigner ? ||| La'pa Rut natlin nana Bo'as lirni re dewade nwaltiora-nwalteman la na'nama nakot la niwra , Amee ! A ' di de hya ' id a ' pua a'mu ntutga kalwiedwed lawan de mai a ' u ? ! A ' di de dakn id a ' u . Nihya ' pede a'mu nma nkokan nohora a ' u ? !
Boaz answered her , I have been told all about what you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband , and how you have left your father , your mother , and the land of your birth , and have come to a people that you did n't know before . ||| Mere Bo'as nakot la niwra , A'utlin momuog oleka o nhiolmu-lietmu maka ha mtiutga la yananmu , la ' a ler maka o muanke'emu nmat pia la'pa ntutu-nte'ela dodo'ondi . Agat niohora olek walia de omultarga inmu-ammu la ' a o nohomu-raimu pa ma mdien wut lia ' a makden Israel ri maka ha muplin niohor ma'ta .
May the LORD repay your work , and a full reward be given to you from the LORD , the God of Israel , under whose wings you have come to take refuge . ||| Pena wuak la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A pa E ' ed mak kwahla nhioli-liet samomuoumu maka ha mtiutg oleka re . Pen neka ORGAHI-ORHA ' A , riy Israel re Uplerlawanni de Nhuri-ntowria pripanni-fa'anni la tiy o ' a onnila miy hihi'imu-yapyapmu re , yoma omua pia muiwra mmuori-mdiar lia E nayanni .
Then she said , Let me find favor in your sight , my lord , because you have comforted me , and because you have spoken kindly to your servant , though I am not as one of your servants . ||| Noma Ruta nwahla lirni niwra , A ' di de mak kakleha weli id a ' u . Hopopna-lili'iru ata-wa'ara mak kar lia a'mu nek de a ' g edon gor la . Mere a'mu nhar lirni mai o hopopanmu a ' di , nheik la a ralam kalwiedwe'du pa a ralmu namtiertierun wa . Ne awuakwak pa hota aghi ' reri hya ' maka kla'nan a'mu ralamni de .
At meal time Boaz said to her , Come here , and eat some bread , and dip your morsel in the vinegar . She sat beside the reapers , and they passed her parched grain . She ate , was satisfied , and left some of it . ||| La'pa riwra ra'an wa dewade Bo'as npolga Rut pa niwra , Ruta ! Mmuai pia ta'ana ! Mua'ala rot di oke ' pa mtio ' a la ' sidu . Dewade Ruta nor rewre'wa makreiki-kwo'ora re pa ra'ana-remun wutu . Bo'as ntania wetra ' lawna mak radarni pa Ruta na'an pa npepuehera . La'pa rwairwa mere Ruta ta'ennian na'an momuoga gahani pa nhi ' targa .
When she had risen up to glean , Boaz commanded his young men , saying , Let her glean even among the sheaves , and do n't reproach her . Also pull out some for her from the bundles , and leave it . Let her glean , and do n't rebuke her . ||| Nhorwua noma Ruta nla pa nalir owa'ana wetra ' lawna harni maka ha ratuin doinia la . La'pa Ruta nto'or wa noma Bo'as nakot la mak kari re niwra , La'pa patke ' de nalir niana wetra ' lawna dom makden la har maka ha ra niutin taru oleka onni mana , de yan mia'ala ! Onde yana mpiolliohora , yanhi'pa nmola-nma ' a ne yan memmemna miwenan la . Rerehniana mtiotpa mhi ' atuinia maka ha mteti oleka re oke ' e-oke'ela totpena natopal nana .
So she gleaned in the field until evening , and she beat out that which she had gleaned , and it was about an ephah of barley . ||| Pede Ruta nru'rer niek yatopla pa nodia la lera nheria . La'pa nwaliwra maka ha nawok nana re honona noma nlernana wetra ' lawna jelai la'pa edonna nhal de kilu termida .
She took it up , and went into the city . Then her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned , and she brought out and gave to her that which she had left after she had enough . Her mother-in-law said to her , Where have you gleaned today ? Where have you worked ? Blessed be he who noticed you . She told her mother-in-law with whom she had worked , The man 's name with whom I worked today is Boaz . ||| Nhor pua nla'awa leta noma nala yodni rella la ' a yananni , me nal wal lia yamananni maka takenniana na'ana la dodo'ona . La'pa yananni Na'omi namkek memna wetra ' lawna maka nlernan oleka de dewade natian nohora niwa , Inee ! Omliernan hari honona la hanmeni ? Me omkar lia ' he ' a nhyi'ini-elawni ? Uplerlawnu nee ! Pena Mhilpai-muanatga riy maka khi ' a nhioli-liet dilla mai ami . Noma Ruta nakot la niwra , La ' a nhyi ' maka a'uliria wetra ' lawan la de , matromni nwawa Bo'as .
Naomi said to her daughter-in-law , May he be blessed by the LORD , who has not abandoned his kindness to the living and to the dead . Naomi said to her , The man is a close relative to us , one of our near kinsmen . ||| Noma Na'omi ema rtaplelertarga pa niwra , Hota Bo'as de it nek hade . La ' plollolli de e ' ed maka kamkek mita . Awuak pa ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Ntera-ndem a nar mamni de ! Yoma E ed mak ktut reria E ralam kalwiedni la ' a mak kmati oleka me mak kmormior mia'ta di .
Ruth the Moabitess said , Yes , he said to me , ‘ You shall stay close to my young men until they have finished all my harvest . ' ||| Noma Ruta nakot nohor wal lia yananni Na'omi niwra , Ina , hade edon nmeh ' a , mere riy de enano'tar wualia a ' u niwra pena , agor rewre'wa makreiki re pa a'ulir pia nodi liarni la'pa rieik-wnio'or lerni de nhor muemna .
Naomi said to Ruth her daughter-in-law , It is good , my daughter , that you go out with his maidens , and that they not harm you in any other field . ||| Noma Na'omi nakot la Ruta niwra , Ineee ! Talan samomuog olek hade tiy o'owa ! Totpena nhi'inde omuor wutga inmu-elmu re pa mkiar riere'wa la ' a Bo'as nhyi'ini de . Yoma la'pa omkar lia ' riy meheni nhyi'ini de yanpa riy rarie'yu .
So she stayed close to the maidens of Boaz , to glean to the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest , and she lived with her mother-in-law . ||| Pede lera-ler nekpa Rut nlernohor reria patke ' mak kar lia la ' a Bo'as nhyi'ini pa nodia la'pa rieiki-wnio'or lerni nhorwua . Ne Rut mana edonna nhoitio'or la yananni Na'omi mere rrora rhol wiutu la ' a roma ida .
Naomi her mother-in-law said to her , My daughter , shall I not seek rest for you , that it may be well with you ? ||| Lera ida ne Na'omi nakot la Ruta niwra , Yannie , a ' g e wuahak meman pa plet pa omuehlim owa'ana , totpena muanke'emu natiak o ' a , me nkar pia nala ya'ana-yemnu hewewta-naniairi totpena ralammu nlerla mtiertierannu .
Now is n't Boaz our kinsman , with whose maidens you were ? Behold , he will be winnowing barley tonight on the threshing floor . ||| O ' e muora inmu-elmu re e mkiar lia ' a Bo'as nhyi'ini toh ! Ne Bo'as de it neka de pede mitlina me ! Hota la ' mel di de enor mak kari re rkar lia gen miaka nhi'inde rataiya wetra ' lawna harni
Therefore wash yourself , anoint yourself , get dressed , and go down to the threshing floor , but do n't make yourself known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking . ||| Pa plet pa mlia muroh ' u nanpena mhid wu'ru-mhid gania inonmu pa muhuwu-muwoinia mikmikarni me mniairia naniayarmu maka samomuounu . Totpena mel di de mlia ' a gen mieni maka Bo'as nora mak kari re ha rataiya wetra ' lawan la de . Mere mpieiwiei niek la hande la'pa ena'ana-nemnu pa nhorwua . Me mutiak reria , yanhi'pa enatg o ' etla hande .
It shall be , when he lies down , that you shall note the place where he is lying . Then you shall go in , uncover his feet , and lie down . Then he will tell you what to do . ||| Mumkek nek pa nla nanina hanmeni , dewade muwrik temna nanpena mkeiya nhiekarnu tawnu me mlie'eru la lakni onni . Hota la'pa na'eram nan o ' wa de , mutlin neka la hya ' maka nhopan pa omhi ' a .
She said to her , All that you say , I will do . ||| Yowa ina ! Hya ' maka omukota de hota aghi ' momuou lia .
She went down to the threshing floor , and did everything that her mother-in-law told her . ||| Dewade Ruta nla'awa la ' a gen miaka ha rataiya wetra ' lawna har la de dewade nhi ' momuoga hya ' maka yananni ha nakota re .
When Boaz had eaten and drunk , and his heart was merry , he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain . She came softly , uncovered his feet , and lay down . ||| La'pa Bo'as na'an pa nhorwua demade ralamni nahepru lia wniarora-wnialai la ' a hare honona maka Uplerlawna ha Nal la e ' a pa edon nalo'on wali ne nla nanina la ' a wetra ' lawna ola maka ha ramou pua raniutin taru re , onni . Dewade Ruta nawrik temna Bo'as , na'nama nkei mnapnapla nhiekarnu tawnu na'nama nanina la lakni onni .
At midnight , the man was startled and turned himself , and behold , a woman lay at his feet . ||| La'pa mela letargara ne Bo'as nhedgamata pa nwalia inonni noma namkek memna Ruta inonni , dewade nhedma noma
He said , Who are you ? She answered , I am Ruth your servant . Therefore spread the corner of your garment over your servant , for you are a near kinsman . ||| natiana niwra , Patke ' meni o ' a ? Noma Ruta nwalola niwra , A ' u , o hopopanmu Ruta ama ! La ' a'mu o ' nanpena ed mak kodi plolli la a mormio'ru yoma it di de riy meheni atia ' ita . Mtiulan pa mhi ' a lia patmu !
He said , You are blessed by the LORD , my daughter . You have shown more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning , because you did n't follow young men , whether poor or rich . ||| Noma Bo'as nakot la niwra , Awuak de pena ORGAHI-ORHA ' A ed maka kala ra'ani-pallu tiy o ' a de ina ! La'pa itawalliohora hya ' maka ha mhi ' a la yananmu , de hota nhiolmu di mana ntutga la dodo'ondi de o kalwiedmu narehi owa'ana . Yoma o ' di de muatu muodia inonmu pede , o ' edon muhaka muanke ' a id maka tuwuar mia'ta , la ' a riy maktaru onde riy mak kakleha-kaplara totpena omuora mmiehlima , mere omliernohora yananmu wniakni .
Now , my daughter , do n't be afraid . I will do to you all that you say , for all the city of my people knows that you are a worthy woman . ||| La ' hade pede yan mumta'ata , yoma la ' a let di liewnu de riy rat niohora o ' di de pat kalwiedwed id o ' a , pa ra'uli o ' a . Pena hya ' maka ha mpuaka re , a ' g ed maka hota khi ' a re .
Now it is true that I am a near kinsman . However , there is a kinsman nearer than I . ||| Hota o lirmu de plola . A ' g ed maka kodi plolli la o mormiormu , yoma it di de riy id ita . Mere la it di de , riy id ed ma'ta la . La e ' nanpena ed maka kodi plolli meman tiy o ' a .
Stay this night , and in the morning , if he will perform for you the part of a kinsman , good . Let him do the kinsman 's duty . But if he will not do the duty of a kinsman for you , then I will do the duty of a kinsman for you , as the LORD lives . Lie down until the morning . ||| Mel di de yana mlia ' a pleini . Repar doin nanpena apuolga ononni mak kodi plolli tiy o ' a pa utiana totpena tat muemna hota toto ' a pa ena'aw niana o ' me edonna . La'pa enwayow de , inhatta , mere nwayotlia de pena aliokar meman la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A mak kodi plolli de hota a ' g ed maka ka'aw nian o ' a . Lira emkade nek wa pa taninit wa pa repar pena !
She lay at his feet until the morning , then she rose up before one could discern another . For he said , Let it not be known that the woman came to the threshing floor . ||| Dewade Ruta nanina la Bo'as lakni onni pa nodia pa repra . Repreparreri loka-lak ma'ta dewade Ruta ema rhedgamata yanpa riy ratga . Yoma Bo'as nahmen pa yan riy ida nat niohora Ruta nma nanin la Bo'as onni la ' a gen miaka ha rataiya wetra ' lawan de .
He said , Bring the mantle that is on you , and hold it . She held it , and he measured six measures of barley , and laid it on her , then he went into the city . ||| Noma Bo'as nakot la Ruta niwra , Muo'ludoinia kok no ' wawainmu de selendang pa mpueran targa la handi . Noma Ruta no'lu doinia kok no ' wawayanni de pa nweran targa la hande wa . Dewade Bo'as na'ala kok de na'nama ntoman nana wetra ' lawna , edonna nhal de kilu terampwotelu na'nama nrana la Rut wawayanni pa nakwar la pa nla'awa ! Nhorwua noma Bo'as nla'awa la leta .
When she came to her mother-in-law , she said , How did it go , my daughter ? She told her all that the man had done for her . ||| La'pa Ruta nte'ewa la ir romni nayanni , dewade yananni natiana niwra , Yannie ! Emkameni la it niaoh'mani la ' orawi ? Noma Ruta nwahaur momuoga hya ' maka Bo'as ha nhi ' a la .
She said , He gave me these six measures of barley , for he said , ‘ Do n't go empty to your mother-in-law . ' ||| Ne Ruta nakot wal lia yananni niwra , Wetra ' lawna ri honona re , e ' ed mak kala , yoma niwra , Omlia'wa de yana limmu nahgallia la it inni de !
Then she said , Wait , my daughter , until you know what will happen , for the man will not rest until he has settled this today . ||| Noma Na'omi nhar lirni pa nakot la Ruta niwra , Itwei niek wa ine ! La ' ler di meman pa Bo'as nhi ' memna hya ' maka ha nakottarg oleka de , pede mpueiwiei niekpa tamkek memna hya ' maka ha rhi ' nana !
Now Boaz went up to the gate and sat down there . Behold , the near kinsman of whom Boaz spoke came by . Boaz said to him , Come over here , friend , and sit down ! He came over , and sat down . ||| La ' ler de Bo'as nla ' a gen miaka nhi'inde ha rawoka-rale ' lia la ' a leta puohra lawna gaini . La'pa namtatna la hande na'nama nta'wa rer miatni la a'na muanke ' a mak klol hande totpena namkek nana Elimelek rimormiorni maka enakot nohora oleka la ' Ruta , totpena npolga . Edon nalo'on wali ne hyalli de mak kodi plolli pa ntulan la ir Naomi , maka Bo'as ha nwei rieria inhatta pa ed mak klereti . Noma Bo'as npolga hyalli de pa nma namtatna la ' hande .
Boaz took ten men of the elders of the city , and said , Sit down here , and they sat down . ||| Na'nama Boas nla npolg awok walia ama-yei riy termid pa ramtatan walia pa rhi ' nohora la ' a hya ' maka ha niwra nakot nohora .
He said to the near kinsman , Naomi , who has come back out of the country of Moab , is selling the parcel of land , which was our brother Elimelech 's . ||| Noma Bo'as nakot la riy maka enor wutga la luwu-a'na de niwra , It honnonita tatg oleka de Na'omi nwatiag oleka Moab pa nmai wia . Dodo'ondi de niwra na'olga nohanna maka Elimelek , it rimormiorni mak kmati olek de gahani .
I thought I should tell you , saying , ‘ Buy it before those who sit here , and before the elders of my people . ' If you will redeem it , redeem it , but if you will not redeem it , then tell me , that I may know . For there is no one to redeem it besides you , and I am after you . He said , I will redeem it . ||| La a wniaro'ru de ononni o ' pa samomuounu de a'ukot nohora totpena omuat niohor memna . Emkameni la o wniarormu la ' tan diena ? La'pa omiwra muwelia pa mtieman reria de mukota totpena ama-yei lieta ri la'pa riy honona mai handi rat niohor memna . Mere la'pa muhmen de mukota , totpena tat niohora momuoga ! Yoma itro ' nanpena todi plolli la nohanna-taniarta re . Mere o ' edonan nanpena a ' u . Noma hyalli de niwra , Yowa a'uwelia wa !
Then Boaz said , On the day you buy the field from the hand of Naomi , you must buy it also from Ruth the Moabitess , the wife of the dead , to raise up the name of the dead on his inheritance . ||| Noma Bo'as nakot la niwra , Samoga ! Mere mutlina , la'pa muwelia tan die la ' a it inni Na'omi , de mliernan walia pat Moab maka Na'omi a'nani Mahlon ha nto'or nan de . Hota omuora mmiehlima totpena mliernan a'na muanke ' a ida mak hota klernan tan die , totpena tan die ha nden nek la ' a Mahlon de rimormiorni .
The near kinsman said , I ca n't redeem it for myself , lest I endanger my own inheritance . Take my right of redemption for yourself , for I ca n't redeem it . ||| Noma riy de mak kodi plolli pa ntulan la Na'omi nakot la Bo'as niwra , La'pa o e mpuapan wutga pat Moab de la ' a tani die , de yan nek wa . La dodo'ondi de plola a ' g ed mak plollolli pa a'uwelia , mere ta'en niana aghi ' nana pede omua ' nek la wa . Yoma la'pa a'uwel hade mana hota a durtu-waitu edonna rlernan walia tan die . La'pa emkameni de omuwel nieka wa .
Now this was the custom in former time in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning exchanging , to confirm all things , a man took off his sandal , and gave it to his neighbor , and this was the way of formalizing transactions in Israel . ||| Mere la ' ler ululu la ' a makden Israel re , de hameni mak ka'olu-kala ' a hanni hadoma , onde ra rwahernia , de nhi'inde riy id la ira no'lu doinia lakni wniowni , pa nala la ida . Makden la Israel re deullu-tatarni emkade totpena riy rat niohora plola pa ra'olu onde rwahernia oleka .
So the near kinsman said to Boaz , Buy it for yourself , then he took off his sandal . ||| La ' hade pede riy de nakot la Bo'as niwra , Itro ' gahani hade mere o ' ed maka kawelia la Na'omi pa agolin lim la ne omuala a la'ku wniowni di !
Boaz said to the elders and to all the people , You are witnesses today , that I have bought all that was Elimelech 's , and all that was Chilion 's and Mahlon 's , from the hand of Naomi . ||| Noma Bo'as nhar lirni pa nakot la ama-yei re ror wutu riy maka khopnu-kpepan la hande pa niwra , La ' ler di de hononmi mimkek memna a ' g ed mak kawelia la ' Na'omi , la ' a hare honona maka Elimelek nora a'nani Kilion nora Mahlon ha rto'or nan oleka re honona .
Moreover , Ruth the Moabitess , the wife of Mahlon , I have purchased to be my wife , to raise up the name of the dead on his inheritance , that the name of the dead may not be cut off from among his brothers and from the gate of his place . You are witnesses today . ||| Me la ' walia aghi ' walia pat mak kwawa Rut , riy Moab maka Mahlon ha nto'or nan de pa agora mmehlima . La ' hade pede tan miaka a'uweli olek de ho'mana nden owa'an la genni pa orgah miak kmati olek me luwnu-a'nani mak kmormiori rteman reri owa'an genni . Totpena hota Mahlon mak kmati oleka de , duratni-waitni rhoratreria e ' a , me makden handi mana rhoratreri e tuini-wedni . Mhioratreria ! Ama-yei lieta , me ama-hyali miy hononmi e mtiutrier wial pia ami e makot nohor hari honona kalwiedoo !
All the people who were in the gate , and the elders , said , We are witnesses . May the LORD make the woman who has come into your house like Rachel and like Leah , which both built the house of Israel , and treat you worthily in Ephrathah , and be famous in Bethlehem . ||| Dewade ama-yei lieta ror neka riy honona makden la hande honona mana rharlirni pa riwra , Yowe ! Am e rwal di le saksi ! Ampakwak de pena ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Ntera-ndema patke'emu pa emekwalima Rahel nora Lea rayor niana upa-a'na rahu la Yakob pa nadurit nana mutga Israel , totpena o ' mana mliernana pripanni-fa'anni , pede makden Efrata re rwetwet la nanmu la mai leta Betlehem di .
Let your house be like the house of Perez , whom Tamar bore to Judah , of the offspring which the LORD will give you by this young woman . ||| Ampak de upa-a'na maka ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nala tiy o ' pa pat hararar de nayori-nadar niana re , hota rhi ' a miy lupmi-a'nami re pa riy liawanni emeknekama Peres , Yehuda nora Tamar a'nani de !
So Boaz took Ruth and she became his wife , and he went in to her , and the LORD enabled her to conceive , and she bore a son . ||| La'pa Bo'as nora Ruta rmehlimpa noma ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nala a'na muanke ' a id pa Ruta na'uhu-na'apun nana . La'pa Ruta nmoria a'nani muanke ' de ,
The women said to Naomi , Blessed be the LORD , who has not left you today without a near kinsman . Let his name be famous in Israel . ||| dewade a'na patke ' a makden la hande rakot la Na'omi riwra , Na'omia ! Pen ta'uli-tawed reria ORGAHI-ORHA ' A , yoma Enal oleka a'na muanke ' a id pa o mhi ' a la up ku'umu pa hota e ' ed maka ktera-klahg o ' a , elee ! Twakwak de pena makden Israel re rwetweta la upmu de nanni .
He shall be to you a restorer of life and sustain you in your old age , for your daughter-in-law , who loves you , who is better to you than seven sons , has given birth to him . ||| O yananmu patke ' de ralamni kalwieda la o ' a . Ha nal tiy o ' de narehi lawna hya ' maka a'na muanke ' a harahu hota ha rala la amni . Dodo'ondi de enal oleka keke'enku id pa mpua'upa , pa hota o ralammu namtiertierun owa'ana me hota keke'en de ed maka ktera-klahg o'ola la ' a tormu ntutu-onmu nwa ' a masa tua .
Naomi took the child , laid him in her bosom , and became nurse to him . ||| Noma Na'omi na'ala upni de pa nakauga . Noma keke'enku ' de nalawlawan lola de Na'omi ed mak ka'oka-kakania .
The women , her neighbors , gave him a name , saying , A son is born to Naomi . They named him Obed . He is the father of Jesse , the father of David . ||| A'na patke ' a la ' a rom heiwiali re riwra , Na'omi nlernan oleka a'na muanke ' a id wa ! Dewade rala keke'en de pa nwawa Obed . Obed di , ed maka hota ka ' a'ana nana Isai , me Isai ed mak ka'an nana ray Daud .
Now this is the history of the generations of Perez , Perez became the father of Hezron , and Hezron became the father of Ram , and Ram became the father of Amminadab , and Amminadab became the father of Nahshon , and Nahshon became the father of Salmon , and Salmon became the father of Boaz , and Boaz became the father of Obed , and Obed became the father of Jesse , and Jesse became the father of David . ||| Ray Daud upni-tgarni de Peres . Yoma Peres kotnu-turnu gerni-wniaunu upni-a'nani duratni-waitni nani ertile , Peres na ' a'n nana Hesron , Hesron na ' a'n nan Rama , Ram na ' a'na nan Aminadaba , Aminadab na ' a'n nan Nahason , Nahason na ' a'n nana Salmona , Salmon na ' a'n nana Bo'as , Bo'as na ' a'n nan Obed , Obed na ' a'n nan Isai , Isai na ' a'n nana ray Daud .
Now in the days of Ahasuerus this is Ahasuerus who reigned from India even to Ethiopia , over one hundred twenty-seven provinces , ||| La ' ler ululu de Ray Aswerus nodi plolli la propinsi rahu ida terampworu wehrani wo'itu de nwaga la ' a India pa nla ntut lia la ' a Etiopia .
in those days , when the King Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom , which was in Susa the palace , ||| La ' ler de de ray de nden la letlawna Susan pa nodi plolli la ' a e kruwun gen makden hande .
in the third year of his reign , he made a feast for all his princes and his servants , the army of Persia and Media , the nobles and princes of the provinces being before him . ||| La'pa nodi plolli nana anni la'pa wotellu , dewade ray Aswerus nhopan pa rhi ' a yahepur lawna la o'ta-mat lalawna ror wutga E ' a niutnu-nhianni nhielli-liarni . Makodi ahu namni kepala perang la ' a Persia nora Media ror wal pia rma ra'ana-remun la la ' a mei yamuki-yahepur de , me emkade wal lia ' a gubernura re honona ror wutga tniutnu-nhianni nhielli-liarni re honona .
He displayed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honor of his excellent majesty many days , even one hundred eighty days . ||| La ' a wolan tetem wonema ray Aswerus ntutga re'eni-tniarnu mak kareh mieman de la ' a makden la E kruwun genni istana me la ' a e ' inponni nor wutga e tullu-petanni la ' a e lodani-hairni .
When these days were fulfilled , the king made a seven day feast for all the people who were present in Susa the palace , both great and small , in the court of the garden of the king 's palace . ||| La'pa wolan wonema re nhorwua noma ray nhi ' walia ya'ana-yemun lawna la ' a lima-rora makden la Susan , la'pa kuku'uni-lalawanni honona re rmai momuou pua rre'ela ra'ana-remun la mei wawannu . Ra'ana-remun nan la ' a lera wo'itu , la ' a ray krwuwn genni herni walli-walli mak ha rtamnia ora-au lia hande me ndella ' lutru-lutru ralamni .
There were hangings of white and blue material , fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and marble pillars . The couches were of gold and silver , on a pavement of red , white , yellow , and black marble . ||| Rala koka maka mnurnu'ru maka yamkekni motmota me wawahra pa rwairia la ' a kruwun gen die herni-gaini walli-walli de . Rala tali mnurnurhu maka yamkekni wawahra me ponpona pa rwahtiera wutga kok de la ' a le ' u muaka ha rhi ' nan la perak , totpa rwanin targa la riri maka ha rhi ' a la watu wawahra mak klitlit memna . La ' walli yaw de rken wutwutga lewu ku ' a maka ha rhi ' nan la maha nor peraka , maka nhi'inde rnairia pa ra'ana-remnu la wawannu . Rkeni lewu ku ' a la ' a tehel wawannu maka ha rhi ' a la mutiar ulti mak klipa-ka'ma , me watu wawahra nor wutga watu-watu dom to ' a mak kwelli werta me mak klipa-ka'ma .
They gave them drinks in golden vessels of various kinds , including royal wine in abundance , according to the bounty of the king . ||| Ray nhur tiar wutwutga anggur tur liawanni maka ha rhoi tiar wutwutga la lari niemun geni maka ha rhi ' nana la maha . Me la niemun geni re to ' a-taiya .
In accordance with the law , the drinking was not compulsory , for so the king had instructed all the officials of his house , that they should do according to every man 's pleasure . ||| Mak ha rpolu-rwak nana re , anggur tur rla ' a-rmai lia re . Yoma ray nhar lirni la ' a riy maka ktulla-kar lia ray kruwannu de niwra , Mhioi-mtan lia makhopnu-kpepna re de mlier nohora ir wakwakni .
Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal house which belonged to King Ahasuerus . ||| Wasti , ray patni de mana , nhi ' walia ya'ana-yemun nhioi-tniani la ' a pata-mapra mak kahnioi-kapniepan la ' a ray kruwungenni de ralamni .
On the seventh day , when the heart of the king was merry with wine , he commanded Mehuman , Biztha , Harbona , Bigtha , and Abagtha , Zethar , and Carcass , the seven eunuchs who served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king , ||| La'pa nte'ela lera wo'itnu la ' a ya'an lawan de , dewade Ray nemun nande ralamni nahepuepur memna , noma npolga riy mandidit muaka rtut tiarga pa ray nhi'inde ha nakot nohora la ' a hya ' maka ha niwra nhi ' a . La ' ir wo'itu de Mehuman , Bista , Harbona , Bigta , Abagta , Setar , me Karkas .
to bring Vashti the queen before the king wearing the royal crown , to show the people and the princes her beauty , for she was beautiful . ||| Noma nhopan pa rla rala ratu Wasti pa rodia la e ' de de nawutu-nalai nian memna wutu-lai lodna-hairi . Ratu Wasti gaini maka samomuounu de ray niwra ntutga la ' a o'ta-mata lalawna ror wutga mak ha npolniana-nwak nana re .
But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king 's commandment by the eunuchs . Therefore the king was very angry , and his anger burned in him . ||| Mere la'pa mak ha nhopna re rakot nohora ray lirni la ratu Wasti , mere ratu Wasti edonna nwayow nan ray polpuollu de pa nahmena nmai , reiniande ray nahankeran memna !
Then the king said to the wise men , who knew the times for it was the king 's custom to consult those who knew law and judgment , ||| Nhi'inde la'pa rler la emkade de ray nwahak lir la ' a makat niohora deulu-tatra riorni-liaini . La hade pede rpolga makano ' a-ka'atlia la ' ray genni-tienni nanpena er makat niohora hota hya ' ed maka ha retia la lir makemkare .
and next to him were Carshena , Shethar , Admatha , Tarshish , Meres , Marsena , and Memucan , the seven princes of Persia and Media , who saw the king 's face , and sat first in the kingdom , ||| Maka nhi'inde ray ha npolpuol nieka de , Karsna , Setar , Admata , Tarsis , Meres , Marsena , me Memukan . Hare er maka kano ' a-ka'atga ray Persia nora Media pede rhi ' a o'ta mata tutullu la ' a lodna-hairi .
What shall we do to Queen Vashti according to law , because she has not done the bidding of the King Ahasuerus by the eunuchs ? ||| Noma ray nakot la riy mandiditu re niwra , A ' g e ghopan pa mak khima-kre ' a ' u re rla rpolga ratu Wasti pa nmai a ' di , mere nahmena nmai ! Pa la ' a deulu-tatra de hota hadi lol hya ' talla ?
Memucan answered before the king and the princes , Vashti the queen has not done wrong to just the king , but also to all the princes , and to all the people who are in all the provinces of the King Ahasuerus . ||| Noma Memukan nhar lirni pa nakot la ray nora o'ta mat lalawna korni pa niwra , Hota la ' a nhioli-liet mak emkare de ray edonna nmeh ' a nlernana molmola-mama ' a la ' a ratu Wasti hihi'ini-yapyapni di , mere la ' a o'ta-mata honona ror wutga a'na muanke ' a honona la ' a lodna-hair di nek de hota rru ' rieri-rtowar rer wial lia ' a ratu Wasti hihi'ini-yayapni di .
For this deed of the queen will become known to all women , causing them to show contempt for their husbands when it is reported , ‘ King Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought in before him , but she did n't come . ' ||| Yoma ratu Wasti nhiolli de hota nayatlin la ' a a'na patke ' a re honona , ne hota rakleha ya'unni-yamta'at la ' a rima-rima muanke'eni . Hota patke ' a re riwra , Ray npolga ratu Wasti pa nma ntut gaini la ray nek de ratu Wasti nahmena nmai .
Today , the princesses of Persia and Media who have heard of the queen 's deed will tell all the king 's princes . This will cause much contempt and wrath . ||| Hya ' ho'me ami ! La ' dodo'ondi mana mak kla o'ta-mata lalawani la hairi Media me Persia , a pat mamni mana ratlin nan oleka ratu de hihi'ini , pede hota a pat mamni re edon ratlin owa'an la mai ami . Pa hota narieiniande pata-mapra re honona edonna ratlin la hawni , me a'na muanke ' a honona mana rahankeran rer lia ' a patke'eni re mai ita lodanni-hairni !
If it pleases the king , let a royal commandment go from him , and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes , so that it can not be altered , that Vashti may never again come before King Ahasuerus , and let the king give her royal estate to another who is better than she . ||| La ' hade pede ampak de hota tuna netlia totpa taken niana ratu Wasti nma ntutg owa'an gaini la tuna . Maka tuna hota ha netlia de rhi ' a la riora-liai warwuaru id pa rnairia la mai Persia nora Media di lodanni-hairni totpena hya ' maka tuna ha netlia de plollolli inhatta pa rnairia . Taken niana rherun doin riora-liai die . Nhor nianpena muala ratu Wasti mtatangenni della la ' patke ' a dom to ' a maka nhiolli de nareh dioin Wasti nhiolli .
When the king 's decree which he shall make is published throughout all his kingdom for it is great , all the wives will give their husbands honor , both great and small . ||| La'pa hya ' a maka tuna ha netlia de nwewar la ' a lodna-hair di liewnu , de hota a'na patke ' a re honona ratu rhu'ru-rhelam la hawni muanke ' a nayanni , la'pa rlernana kuku'uni-lalawanni ho'mana ra'unni-ramta'ata deulu-tatar de .
This advice pleased the king and the princes , and the king did according to the word of Memucan , ||| Lir maka Memukan ha nakot de ray nora o'ta-mata re honona rwayow pa rnairia me ray mana nlernohora !
for he sent letters into all the king 's provinces , into every province according to its writing , and to every people in their language , that every man should rule his own house , speaking in the language of his own people . ||| Dewade na'enyat horta-hairi pa nwewar la ' a propinsi re honona la ' a lodna-hairni de , de nnairia yawala nora nhiorta la ' a leta-leta honona yawal wamueheni . La ' a ray titni de lirni emkadi , La ' a roma nihi-lewu-nhiaiti wa , de hawa muanke ' a ed maka khi ' a o'tani la hade , me la ' e ' nanpena ed maka ketlia ' hare honona .
After these things , when the wrath of King Ahasuerus was pacified , he remembered Vashti , and what she had done , and what was decreed against her . ||| La'pa nto'or la ' lera-mela re wa dewade ray ralamni mana edon nawen owa'an la Wasti , ne nhoratreria ratu Wasti . E nhioratni de enod rer mia'ta hihi ' a-yapyap miaka ratu Wasti ha nhi ' a la e ' a me la walia ' hya ' maka e na nukmu oleka la ratu Wasti .
Then the king 's servants who served him said , Let beautiful young virgins be sought for the king . ||| La hade pede maka nhi'inde kala lira-nio ' a la ray re rwaror owa'an ralma-rior id owa'an de riwra , La'pa tun ray nwayowa de tun ray nhopan pa rwahak owa'ana hararar mak gaini samomuou dom owa'ana , mak edon kora ma'ta muanke ' a dom ranina , pa rala la tun ray .
Let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom , that they may gather together all the beautiful young virgins to the citadel of Susa , to the women 's house , to the custody of Hegai the king 's eunuch , keeper of the women . Let cosmetics be given them , ||| Nhi ' pa tun ray nrana mak ktulla-kar lia lodna-hairi la ' a propinsi re honona totpena rwahaka pat harara samomuou honona re pa rma rottiarga la mai tun ray patke'eni re kruwungenni mai Susan di . La hande de Hegai mak khi ' o'tani la mak ktulla-kar pa khima-kre ' a tun ray patke'eni re , hota ed maka kwarora-kwalai niohora pat harara rwarora la ' a yaroha-yararu , wu'ru-lena maka raneuga onde hya'-hya ' to ' maka rhi ' ir pa gaini samouga kecantikan totpena yeher to ' pa ir samounu na'ititar rer lia .
and let the maiden who pleases the king be queen instead of Vashti . The thing pleased the king , and he did so . ||| La'pa nhor nianpena tun ray ed maka namkek samomuou hameni ed maka kla tun-ray ralamni nanpena tun ray na'ala pa nwauga ratu Wasti . Dewade ray nwayow nohora memna yano ' a-yanat die pede pleta-plet pa nlernohora .
There was a certain Jew in the citadel of Susa whose name was Mordecai , the son of Jair , the son of Shimei , the son of Kish , a Benjamite , ||| La ' leta Susan de , de riy Yahudi ida nwawa Mordekai , Yair a'nani de . E ' de Simei nora Kis duratni-waitni de la ' a upa-tgara Benyamin ,
who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captives who had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah , whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away . ||| maka ha rtoran nan hadella ' lera Nebukatnesar , ray Babel nal makden Yerusalem la ' yawa . La ' ler de de ray Nebukatnesar ntoran nan wali Yehuda rayni Yekhonya pa rodia nor wutga makden Yehuda harahu pa rmai lia Babel .
He brought up Hadassah , that is , Esther , his uncle 's daughter , for she had neither father nor mother . The maiden was fair and beautiful , and when her father and mother were dead , Mordecai took her for his own daughter . ||| Mordekai di de inni-narni raralamni ida de pat harara samomuou muaka inonni nawniaknaka , nanni Ester , mere nana tnietohora Ibrani de Hadasa . Ester inni-amni rmati olekwa la ' ler ululu pede Mordekai na'ala pa nhi ' a la a'na raralamni , ne Ester nlawlawan lola la ' a Mordekai romni .
So , when the king 's commandment and his decree was heard , and when many maidens were gathered together to the citadel of Susa , to the custody of Hegai , Esther was taken into the king 's house , to the custody of Hegai , keeper of the women . ||| La'pa rakot nohora ray lirni la ' a noha uhunu-ewatni , dewade pat hararara re mana , leta-leta rwaro'ona re pa rodia la Susan pa Hegai nhima-nre ' a ir honona , me la ' a ler de wal pia e ral walia Ester pa nor wali . La'pa rodia Ester la ray kruwun genni noma rala la Hegai mak khi ' o'tani la ray patni kruwun genni de .
The maiden pleased him , and she obtained kindness from him . He quickly gave her cosmetics and her portions of food , and the seven choice maidens who were to be given her out of the king 's house . He moved her and her maidens to the best place in the women 's house . ||| Hegai ralamni nayod reria Ester pede pleta-plet pa nhi ' samomuou lia . Ntaw dioinia Ester pa rawu'ru-ralena rnairia hya'-hya ' to ' maka ha rhi ' samuou gaini , me nwaliria Ester ya'an wamueheni . Ntaw dioinia Ester la ' a harara dom pa nkenia la gen samomuou memna , la ' a pata-mapra kruwungenni de , ne notil targa la pat harara mandiditu mak kwatiau ray kruwun genni pa rhoi-rtania Ester .
Esther had not made known her people nor her relatives , because Mordecai had instructed her that she should not make it known . ||| Mere Mordekhai nano ' targ olek Ester de yan memmemna nalaharia Ester de Yahudi id e ' a me yan nakot nohora enwatiawa he ' luwnu-a'nani , pede Ester nlernohora e lirni .
Mordecai walked every day in front of the court of the women 's house , to find out how Esther was doing , and what would become of her . ||| Ne la ' lera-ler nekpa Mordekhai nlola patke ' a re kruwun genni gaini , totpa natiantan reria emkameni la Ester .
Each young woman 's turn came to go in to King Ahasuerus after her purification for twelve months for so were the days of their purification accomplished , six months with oil of myrrh , and six months with sweet fragrances and with preparations for beautifying women . ||| Maka lodna-hairi ha ror taru-rlai tiaru de , Pat harar maka ha rwaro'on nana re , de rawu'ru-ralena harella la ' a anni ida . La wolla wonema de rnairia wu'ru maka ha rawah ' a wutga la mur nanpena la ' wolla wonem owa'an demade rnair targho ' a wu'ru hup mikmikri dom owa'an to ' a . La'pa nhorwua nampena rwei niek lerni maka ha rtutga pa harara re nenenan rla ' ray Aswerus de .
The young woman then came to the king like this , whatever she desired was given her to go with her out of the women 's house to the king 's house . ||| La'pa hararar meni maka ha rpolga pa nla ' ray die , nla ' de plolli nek la pat de la ' e naniayarni .
In the evening she went , and on the next day she returned into the second women 's house , to the custody of Shaashgaz , the king 's eunuch , who kept the concubines . She came in to the king no more , unless the king delighted in her , and she was called by name . ||| Rodi pat harara de la ray , de rwei nmel wa nanpena rodia la ' a ray totpena ray nora ranin wutu la ' mel de memna , nhor diemade repardoin nanpena rodia pat della la ' a kruwun geni dom to ' a , totpena Saasgas , riy mak kar lia hande , e ' nanpena ed maka kamkek la ' a ray hawni honona re . Hota pat harara de edonna rawali owa'an la ray . Yan to ' a , ray nwet owa'an la nanni yoma ralamni nala pa npolg owa'ana .
Now when the turn of Esther , the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai , who had taken her for his daughter , came to go in to the king , she required nothing but what Hegai the king 's eunuch , the keeper of the women , advised . Esther obtained favor in the sight of all those who looked at her . ||| Dewade nmai wia Ester nhiakarni pa rodia la ray . La ' ler de de Ester , de Abihaila a'nani maka Abihail hyalli a'nani Mordekhai nhi ' a la a'na raralamni , nlernohora hya ' to ' maka Hegai mak khi ' o'tani la kruwnu patke ' a de ed maka kano ' a-ka'atga la ' a naniairi maka ha nniar pa niwra nla ray . La'pa rodia Ester la ' ray , de he'-he ' to ' mak kamkek e ' a la ler de , rta ' u-rta ' g o'tani yoma ra'ulia la samounu .
So Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus into his royal house in the tenth month , which is the month Tebeth , in the seventh year of his reign . ||| Emkadella la ' ler maka irodia Ester la ray Aswerus kruwun genni la ' a wolla termidni maka ha riwra wolla Tibet la ' a anni wo'it ralamni maka Aswerus nodi plolli la ' a lodna-hair die .
The king loved Esther more than all the women , and she obtained favor and kindness in his sight more than all the virgins , so that he set the royal crown on her head , and made her queen instead of Vashti . ||| La'pa rodi Ester de , Ester ed maka kla'nana ray ralamni pede ray nhioratni ndawarrer miamain la e ' a . Ray sukni la e ' a nareh mieman la ' a ray patke'eni re honona me la ' a hararara korni wali maka ha rwalir nian wutga la Ester . Noma ray Aswerus nala wutu-lai lodna-hairi pa nawutu-nalaiya , nherun doinia ratu Wasti la .
Then the king made a great feast for all his princes and his servants , even Esther 's feast , and he proclaimed a holiday in the provinces , and gave gifts according to the king 's bounty . ||| Nhorwua dewade ray nhi ' a he ' i-hepur lawna la ' a wniatet mei pa na na'uli-nawedia Ester la geni-tienni me npolg awoka o'ta-mat lalawna ror wutga tniutnu-nhiani nhielli-liarni pa rma rhopnu-rpepan la mei wniatetni de wawannu . Ray nhopan pa rhaun la ' a e lodanni-hairni de liewnu pa riy honona rrena la tulla-kniari . La ' ler de wal pia rlernana ray limtutnu maka ray die niwra nala .
When the virgins were gathered together the second time , Mordecai was sitting in the king 's gate . ||| La ' ler maka ha rawoka hararar re la re'eni wornu , de ray nran oleka Mordekhai pa nre'ela nkar lia ' lodna-hairi .
Esther had not yet made known her relatives nor her people , as Mordecai had commanded her , for Esther obeyed Mordecai , like she did when she was brought up by him . ||| Ester edon nakot nohor ma'ta la e ' de de riy Yahudi id e ' a me nwatiauga luwnu-a'nani meni , yoma Mordekhai nawewal targa Ester pa nhi ' emkade . Ester nlernohor ma'ta Mordekhai lirni . E ' edon nran inonni de narehi Mordekhai , mere nhi ' inonni de emeknekama lera e kuku ' ma'ta la ' a Mordekhai mak ha nwanar de limni ralamni .
In those days , while Mordecai was sitting in the king 's gate , two of the king 's eunuchs , Bigthan and Teresh , who were doorkeepers , were angry , and sought to lay hands on the King Ahasuerus . ||| La ' ler ida ne Mordekhai e nkarkiar rier lia ray kruwun genni , dewade riy woru mak katiak reri ray kruwun genni , id nanni Bigtan , me ' id wal die nanni Teres , rora rna'ohma pa riwra rwenna ray Aswerus , yoma rora rahankeran rer lia ray die .
This thing became known to Mordecai , who informed Esther the queen , and Esther informed the king in Mordecai 's name . ||| Rora nnia'ohmani de Mordekhai natlin nan nohora dewade nla ' pa nakota la Ester . La'pa Ester natlin nana dewade nleretniekla nla nakota la ray la ' a hya ' maka Mordekhai nla nakot la e ' a me nakot wal lia niwra Mordekhai ed mak kakot hade la e ' a .
When this matter was investigated , and it was found to be so , they were both hanged on a gallows , and it was written in the book of the chronicles in the king 's presence . ||| Noma ray nhopan pa rwata'wa nohora , de edonna nhal kuku ' la , la ' a Mordekhai ha nakota re . Noma ray netlia pa rla rwair wenna riy maroro ' a re . Ne ray ed mak khopan pa rhorat targa hihi ' a-yapyapi rella la ' a puka tui-wedia lodna-hairi ralamni de , la ' a ray die gaini ralamni .
After these things King Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite , and advanced him , and set his seat above all the princes who were with him . ||| Noma rto'or doin lera-mela re wa dewade lera ida ne ray Aswerus niwra nhi ' samomuou lia riy id mak kwawa Haman . Haman di de Hamedata a'nani la ' a Agag duratni-waitni . Ray Aswerus niwra nhi ' samomuou lia Haman pede nrana Haman pa nhi ' a o'ta lawanni la o'ta-mata lalawanni re honona la ' lodna-hairi die . La ' talan emkade pede Haman nlernana ya'uli-yawedi nhiu'ru-nhielamni onnila ray hihi'ini-yapyapni de .
All the king 's servants who were in the king 's gate bowed down and paid homage to Haman , for the king had so commanded concerning him . But Mordecai did n't bow down or pay him homage . ||| Noma ray nal titni la ' a o'ta-mata korni honona totpena honona re rhu'ru-rhelam la Haman me rwaltiora-rwaltieman la e gaini ralamni . O'ta-mata re honona mak kar lia ray lodanni-hairni ratu ratlina-ratail la ' ray titni de , eneknek to'ama Mordekhai nanpena mak kahmena katlina-katailla ray titni .
Then the king 's servants who were in the king 's gate said to Mordecai , Why do you disobey the king 's commandment ? ||| Noma o'ta-mata dom mak kar lia ray lodanni-hairni la ' a ray kruwun genni de rma pa ratian la ' a-mai Mordekhai niwra , Hya ' a nariei pia o ' edonna mutlin la ' ray titni dena ? !
Now it came to pass , when they spoke daily to him , and he did n't listen to them , that they told Haman , to see whether Mordecai 's reason would stand , for he had told them that he was a Jew . ||| Ne la ' lera-ler nekpa riy rakot la pa natlina-natailla tit de mere Mordekhai edonna nha'wa nan etia lira ida . Mordekhai nakot la re niwra , Ama-hyal miy re , a ' di de riy Yahudi id a ' u , pede taken niana aghi ' nana . Dewade rla rod lir la Haman , totpena rat muemna hota Haman nawenan pa nhukmua Mordekhai onnila hihi'ini-yapyapni de me edonna ?
When Haman saw that Mordecai did n't bow down nor pay him homage , Haman was full of wrath . ||| La ' hade na'nama Haman e nat niohora de Mordekhai edonna nhu'ru-nhelma onde nwaltiora-nwalteman la , dewade Haman nahankeran rer lia .
But he scorned the thought of laying hands on Mordecai alone , for they had made known to him Mordecai 's people . Therefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews who were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus , even Mordecai 's people . ||| La'pa natga de Mordekhai di de riy Yahudi ida di , dewade netlia pa rukum Mordekhai hota edonna nmeh ' a , mere Mordekhai nor wutga riy Yahudi honona de , rwunu-rwenna pa rkuhi-rho'or doin momuoga la ' a ray Aswerus lodanni-hairni .
In the first month , which is the month Nisan , in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus , they cast Pur , that is , the lot , before Haman from day to day , and from month to month , and chose the twelfth month , which is the month Adar . ||| La'pa ray Aswerus nodi plolli nana anni termida wehrani wor wua , la'pa nwaga la wolla yanulu la anin de , mak ha rweta la wolla Nisan , dewade Haman nhopna pa riy rhedga lotre undi la ' e gaini ralamni totpena rat niohora ler meni-wolan meni ed maka ha rnairia pa rhi ' a ira wniarora yatyatni de . Lotre di de makden hande rweta la purim . Dewade tniu'tu nerun la mei pa hota rhi ' a la lera termidni wehrani wotellu , la ' wolla termida wehrani wornu maka ha rweta la wolla Adar .
Haman said to King Ahasuerus , There is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of your kingdom , and their laws are different from other people 's . They do n't keep the king 's laws . Therefore it is not for the king 's profit to allow them to remain . ||| Noma Haman nla ' pa nakot la ray niwra , Tun ray , la ' a it lodanni-hairni di de luwu-a'na suku id edama maka kanie'er la propinsi honona la lodna-hair di ralamni . Luwu-a'na de deullu-tatarni me hihi'ini-yapyapni nlol to ' a la luwu-a'na korni . Ira nhiolli-lietni de rahmena rlernohora nie'era-tniatra la ' a lodna-hair wawannu . Hade pede awuak de yana tuna nanin-namat niohora nhioli-liet mak emkade . Yoma luwu-a'na de edon nod untu hadom la tuna .
If it pleases the king , let it be written that they be destroyed , and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver into the hands of those who are in charge of the king 's business , to bring it into the king 's treasuries . ||| La'pa tun ray nwayowa de tun ray hota nhi ' a horta id mak ha rodia la ' meni-meni totpena rhopna rira pa rkuhi-rho'ora luwu-a'na de la noha wawannu . Ne la'pa tun ray nwayow nohora a ralma rio'ru di de pena agala perak talenta riwnu termida perak kilu riwnu rahu wotelu terampwogat pa agala la maktorna lodna-hairi di re'eni-tniarnu re pa rkenia la kah noha .
The king took his ring from his hand , and gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite , the Jews ' enemy . ||| La'pa ray natlin nan lir de dewade ray orgahani naul doinia kdielli mak kodia ray plolli-mneheni na'nama nala la Haman totpena hota Haman nto ' a la hadom pa ndain wutwutga la horta-hair maka Haman ha nwahaka . Haman di , Hamedata a'nani la Agag duratni-waitni pede nhi ' arwalli la riy Yahudi re honona .
The king said to Haman , The silver is given to you , the people also , to do with them as it seems good to you . ||| Noma ray nakot la Haman niwra , Luwu-a'na mak ha mukota re nor wut nieka kupan mutliawanni re de agala pa omuemueh ' a muetlia . Plolli nek la hya ' maka omuiwra mhi ' a la ir wa !
Then the king 's scribes were called in on the first month , on the thirteenth day of the month , and all that Haman commanded was written to the king 's local governors , and to the governors who were over every province , and to the princes of every people , to every province according to its writing , and to every people in their language . It was written in the name of King Ahasuerus , and it was sealed with the king 's ring . Letters were sent by couriers into all the king 's provinces , to destroy , to kill , and to cause to perish , all Jews , both young and old , little children and women , in one day , even on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month , which is the month Adar , and to plunder their possessions . ||| La'pa nte'ela lerni la ' a wolla yanullu , lerni termida wehrani wotellu , noma Haman npolga riy mak khi'inde rhorta ray horatni-hairni , na'nama nhopna honona rhorta e lirni de rnairia rima-rima yawalli nora nhioratni la ' a propinsi me luwu-a'na honona makden la lodna-hairi Persia . Rhorta horta re lirni de rweta la ray Aswerus nanni , me Haman mana nnairia ray kdielli de pa ndain wutga la horta-hair die . La ' horta lirni de e niwra , La ' a lera termidni wehrani wotellu , la ' wolla termida wehrani wornu maka ha rweta la wolla Adar dewade rwunu-rwenan momuoga riy Yahudi re honona kuku'uni-lalawanni , lokmera-papay onde mak kler olek la mto'oni-ppe'eni lerni , la'pa patke ' a onde muanke ' a mana , yana ha rlewan la wehla gai liokarni , ne re'eni-tniarnu honona mana reyahru momuoga . La ' ler de meman pa rwunu-rwenan momuoga re . Noma horta-hairi de , Haman nhopan pa riy pleta-plet pa rla ' pa rodia la ' a gubernur-gubernur ror wutga o'ta-mata re honona la ' a propinsi re me luwu-a'na honona o'tani-matni totpena honona ratga .
A copy of the letter , that the decree should be given out in every province , was published to all the peoples , that they should be ready against that day . ||| La'pa rsampe oleka de hota o'ta-mata rhopan pa marinu nhaunia tit della la ' a leta-ruhuna honona makden la propinsi re honona totpena rira rat niohor memna me rwahi ' pa rwunu-rwenna Yahudi re la ' ler mak ha rtutg oleka de !
The couriers went out in haste by the king 's commandment , and the decree was given out in the citadel of Susa . The king and Haman sat down to drink , but the city of Susa was perplexed . ||| Pede mak kodi horat re radil doin la pa rla rottiarga horta-hairi rella la ' a propinsi makden la ' a lodna-hair de yoma ray nhiopanni olek hade wa . Noma marinu nhaun wali pia nakot nohora tit della la ' a leta Susan , Persia let lawanni de . Nhorwua noma ray nora Haman rla ' pa rtepartarlia tgo ' arka niemanu , mere tatlin la ' a leta Susan de rkokna-rrarin nohora lir maka loda ha nhauni olek de .
Now when Mordecai found out all that was done , Mordecai tore his clothes and put on sackcloth with ashes , and went out into the middle of the city , and wailed loudly and bitterly . ||| La'pa Mordekhai natlin nana horta-hairi lirni emkade dewade nlihira-nnaiya polla-rainni la ' temni na'nama nhu'ru la kadu raini yaluli-yahona yoma ralamni nmayo ' pa emeknekama mak kaluli-kahona . Nkenia aw lia ' o'tani na'nama nloh leta pa polpuolu-hawaunia la kniakru napolu-natniani .
He came even before the king 's gate , for no one is allowed inside the king 's gate clothed with sackcloth . ||| La'pa nler la ray kruwungenni puohra lawanni gaini , dewade ntut tiar wua yoma riy mak knairia kadu de rwayotlia pa yana nler la rialma .
In every province , wherever the king 's commandment and his decree came , there was great mourning among the Jews , and fasting , and weeping , and wailing , and many lay in sackcloth and ashes . ||| Ne la ' a propinsi meni-meni to ' a de la'pa titni nlergot wa dewade riy Yahudi re rapolu-ratnian wia . Ratahan lar pa koko ' a-herera , me liawanni re rkenia awu nor kadu la tani wawannu pa ranin la wawannu totpa rtutga ralam mayo'oni .
Esther 's maidens and her eunuchs came and told her this , and the queen was exceedingly grieved . She sent clothing to Mordecai , to replace his sackcloth , but he did n't receive it . ||| La'pa patke ' a rora muanke ' a mak khi'inde khima-kre ' a ratu Ester la ' a kruwun genni de , rodia kot la Ester la ' a hya ' a maka Mordekhai ha nhi ' a re , dewade Ester ralamni nmolu-nhelam doin la . Noma nhopan pa rla rottiarga pola-rain samomuou lia Mordekhai totpena na nherun doinia kad muaka ha nnairi re , mere Mordekhai nahmena na'ala .
Then Esther called for Hathach , one of the king 's eunuchs , whom he had appointed to attend her , and commanded him to go to Mordecai , to find out what this was , and why it was . ||| Noma Ester npolga Hatah maka ray Aswerus ntutga pa nhima-nre ' a Ester , pa nla natiana hya ' ed mak kariei pia Mordekhai nhi ' emkadena de ?
So Hathach went out to Mordecai , to the city square which was before the king 's gate . ||| Noma Hatah nla ' pa natiana Mordekhai la ' a ray kruwun genni puohrani gaini , la gen miaka kahgali lapangan kota .
Mordecai told him of all that had happened to him , and the exact sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king 's treasuries for the destruction of the Jews . ||| Dewade Mordekhai nakot momuoga e halli la Haman pede Haman niwa nwahla la e ' a , me la ' walia kupna-kai wo'ir maka Haman ha nano ' tar pua hota nkenia la kah noha totpena riy Yahudi re honona la ' meni-meni de rtipna-rwatna pa rkuhi-rho'or momuoga la ' a lodna-hairi Persia wawannu .
He also gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given out in Susa to destroy them , to show it to Esther , and to declare it to her , and to urge her to go in to the king to make supplication to him , and to make request before him for her people . ||| Mordekhai nal walia horta maka ray ha nal de nhialanni mak kakot nohora hota rkuhi-rho'ora riy Yahudi noha wawannu . Mordekhai nano ' a Hatah la ' pa nala horat della Ester me nakot nohora lir de onni-ga'arni , me nano ' wal pia Ester nmeh ' a nla nwak lilili-mamuau lia ray totpena ntulla-nsaynia ir luwnu-a'nani Yahudi re .
Hathach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai . ||| Dewade Hatah nla'awa pa nakot nohora Mordekhai nnio'oni rella Ester .
Then Esther spoke to Hathach , and gave him a message to Mordecai , ||| Noma Ester nhopn owa'ana nawal pia nla nakot owa'ana emkadilla la ' Mordekhai niwra ,
All the king 's servants and the people of the king 's provinces know that whoever , whether man or woman , comes to the king into the inner court without being called , there is one law for him , that he be put to death , except those to whom the king might hold out the golden scepter , that he may live . I have not been called to come in to the king these thirty days . ||| Mai handi de a'na muanke ' a onde a'na patke ' a maka edonna rpolga pa nma lola ray gaini , mere orgahani nekpa nla ' a ray kruwungen de ralamni , de hota rukum penna , yoma deulu-tatr olek hade pa riy honona la ' a mak kla ' tniutnu-nhiani nhielli-liarni , la'pa lima-rora makden la propinsi re honona mana rat niohor oleka deulu-tatar de wa . Enekek to'ama talla id etla , pa ita edonna tlernan niukmu , de la'pa ray nrana lie'en mahani pa ntutga la riy de , la'pa ray nhi ' emkade de nnia'eratni de riy de edonna nlernan niukmu . Mere la ' wolla id ralamni di de ray edonna npol mua't a ' u .
They told Esther 's words to Mordecai . ||| Noma Hatah nla ' pa nakot Ester nnio'oni della la ' Mordekhai .
Then Mordecai asked them to return this answer to Esther , Do n't think to yourself that you will escape in the king 's house any more than all the Jews . ||| Dewade Mordekhai nwahla owa'ana Ester nnio'oni de pa niwra , Yana mpuarora de hota o ' edon mlier la wniunu-wnienan de yoma omdiella kruwun gen die , mere o ' edon mha'wu nohora hupmu-woinmu Yahudi re pa honona e rmakokan wenna !
For if you remain silent now , then relief and deliverance will come to the Jews from another place , but you and your father 's house will perish . Who knows if you have n't come to the kingdom for such a time as this ? ||| Hota o ' molmuol tio ' u la ' genmu de pa edonna mpwo'la nohora nohwalmu re , mere emkade ho'mana hota riy Yahudi rlernan talan dom to ' pa rler la mormiori-lewlewna , mere omuora ammu huwnu-woyanni hot tmat miomuou ! Mere yanpa rtutg o ' pa omlia ratu la ' lera-mela ri totpena mhi ' talan kalwiedwed id hadella pa Yahudi it tlerla yamori-yalewna ? !
Then Esther asked them to answer Mordecai , ||| Dewade Ester nal owa'an nnio ' a la ' Mordekhai de niwra ,
Go , gather together all the Jews who are present in Susa , and fast for me , and neither eat nor drink three days , night or day . I and my maidens will also fast the same way . Then I will go in to the king , which is against the law , and if I perish , I perish . ||| Ama , muwoka-mule'ga riy Yahudi honona makden la Susan di pa mukot la re totpa yan memmemna ra'ana-remun la ' lera-mel pa wotelu totpa rsumbain mai a ' u . Pena agor walia a hararar wa'lu maka nhi'inde khima-kre ' a ' u mana pena matahan walia lara . Nhor nioka a ' orgahu lia ' ray de , la'pa nwaghal ag ho'mana takot pa ! Amuati-muor die la a rimormio'ru wawannu !
So Mordecai went his way , and did according to all that Esther had commanded him . ||| Dewade Mordekhai nla ' pa nhi ' momuoga hya ' maka Ester ha nano ' a la e ' a .
Now on the third day , Esther put on her royal clothing and stood in the inner court of the king 's house , next to the king 's house . The king sat on his royal throne in the royal house , next to the entrance of the house . ||| La'pa ntut meman la ' lera wotellu la ler maka Ester natahan larni , dewade na'ala naniairi ratnu na'nama nnairia pa nler la ray kruwun geni la ' rialma na'nama ntutrer lia ray genni gaini mere edon nla ' ma't la rialma eneknek to ' a e ntutrer mia'ta la nhiar mak kapal reria ray liwan genni de . Ne ray mana enaliwan targa la liwan genni mak kapal tiarga nhiar die gaini .
When the king saw Esther the queen standing in the court , she obtained favor in his sight , and the king held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand . So Esther came near and touched the top of the scepter . ||| La'pa namkek nan Ester ntutrer lia tio'ora , dewade ralamni nahepru pa narieinian de nran nan lie'eni mahani pa ntutga la . Dewade Ester nala ' a temna pa nheik la lie'eni de tutnu .
Then the king asked her , What would you like , queen Esther ? What is your request ? It shall be given you even to the half of the kingdom . ||| Noma ray natiana niwra , Hya ' a nhi o ' a nare ? Omuiwra mpuaka hya ' a nare ? Mukota ! Ompuaka hya ' to ' a de hota agala . La'pa ompuatetar la ' a a lodna-hai'ru di enawera la ' woru muana hota agala tiy o ' a !
Esther said , If it seems good to the king , let the king and Haman come today to the banquet that I have prepared for him . ||| Noma Ester nwahla lirni niwra , La'pa tun ray nwayow de , tun ray nora Haman rtiy pa rre'ela ra'an la ' a maka agiwra ghoiya la tun ray ra'ana la ' ler di .
Then the king said , Bring Haman quickly , so that it may be done as Esther has said . So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared . ||| Dewade ray nhopan pa rpolga Haman pa nma natlin walia Ester polpuollu-wakwakni de totpena rewre'wa rla rod niohora . Noma rla'awa la Ester genni .
The king said to Esther at the banquet of wine , What is your petition ? It shall be granted you . What is your request ? Even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed . ||| La'pa remremun reria arka noma ray natiana Ester niwra , Hya ' a maka ha muiwra mpuaka de mukot teka . La'pa hya ' to ' maka ha mpuaka de hota agala . La'pa ompuatetar la ' a a lodna-hai'ru di de enawera la ' wor muana hota agala tiy o ' a !
Then Esther answered and said , My petition and my request is this . ||| Noma Ester nwalolla niwra ,
If I have found favor in the sight of the king , and if it pleases the king to grant my petition and to perform my request , let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I will prepare for them , and I will do tomorrow as the king has said . ||| La'pa tun ray nwayow nana a li'ru me alia ' nana tun-ray ralamni , de tun ray nora Haman rmai owa'an pa rre'ela ra'an la ' a mei maka agiwra ghoi lia ' repar de nanpena a'ukot nohora a wakwa'ku la tun ray .
Then Haman went out that day joyful and glad of heart , but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king 's gate , that he did n't stand up nor move for him , he was filled with wrath against Mordecai . ||| La ' lera Haman nora ray ra'an la ' Ester meini pa nawal wia de Haman nahepur memna yoma Ester nhu'ru-nhelma enora ray pa npolu-nwaka ir totpena ra'an rewre'wa la mei wawannu . Mere la'pa nkil tiutga Mordekhai la ' a ray kruwungenni puohra lawanni gaini de Mordekhai edonna ntutrier lia Haman gaini totpa ntutga nhiu'ru-nhielamni la e ' a . Ya'unni-yamta'ata kuku ' id mana edon ntutga la Haman , pa nhi'nande Haman na'andoin gahani la .
Nevertheless Haman restrained himself , and went home . There , he sent and called for his friends and Zeresh his wife . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana Haman natahan neka ralam mehrani pa nod liarni la romni nayanni . Noma Haman nhopan pa rpolg awoka romhei wialli re ror wutga e patni Seres totpena honona rewre'wa rpa ratlin walia e wniahaurnu .
Haman recounted to them the glory of his riches , the multitude of his children , all the things in which the king had promoted him , and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the king . ||| Haman nleretniekla npo'ona-npei nohora re'eni-tniarnu nor wutga upni-a'nani muanke ' a harahu me la ' walia ray ntutmuata-nkewra ' a pa nareh momuoga ray limni malwiru-malgana re honona pede riy ra'uli e ' a .
Haman also said , Yes , Esther the queen let no man come in with the king to the banquet that she had prepared but myself , and tomorrow I am also invited by her together with the king . ||| Me mak kreh mieman de , ratu Ester nahak e orgahi nmeh ' a pa nora ray ra'an la ratu meini la ' ler de . Ne ratu Ester npolg owa'an e ' pa repar de nora ray ra'an la ' a e meini wawannu owa'ana .
Yet all this avails me nothing , so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king 's gate . ||| Mere emkade ho'mana a ralmu edon nahepur nohora hya ' a maka aliernana re yoma a ralmu e namehra ma'ta la umkek Mordekhai riy Yahudi die namtatan rer nieka la ' a nhiar liawna ray kruwungenni ralamni !
Then Zeresh his wife and all his friends said to him , Let a gallows be made fifty cubits high , and in the morning speak to the king about hanging Mordecai on it . Then go in merrily with the king to the banquet . This pleased Haman , so he had the gallows made . ||| La'pa ratlin nana hya ' maka Haman nwahauria la ira , dewade Haman patke'eni nora rom heiwialli re honona rakot la pa riy rhi ' a riri liawair geni id de tullu meter terampworu wehrani wolima , totpena repar yawyawar ma'ta de nla nwak la ray totpena rla rwairia Mordekhai la ' a rir die hananni nampena hankeranni namdiaru totpena hota nor rewre'wa ray me ratu Ester ra'an wut lia la ' a mei wawannu , de Haman ralamni namtierun wa . La ' Haman wniarorni de lir maka ha rakota re de talanni inhatta , pede nhopan pa rhi ' a riri liawair tutul die .
On that night , the king could n't sleep . He commanded the book of records of the chronicles to be brought , and they were read to the king . ||| La ' mel tetem de ray edonna nanina irannu-matni . Pede nhopan pa rla rala puka tui-wedi lodna-hairi maka e rhorta ray die hihi'ini-yapyapni la ' ler maka e nodi plolli , demade rpaikia pa natlina .
It was found written that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh , two of the king 's eunuchs , who were doorkeepers , who had tried to lay hands on the King Ahasuerus . ||| La ' puk de ralamni de e rhorat targa de e rakot nohor walia Mordekhai la ' lera e ed maka kakota la ray la ' a Bigtan nora Teres maka nhi'inde katiak reria ray kruwungenni , mere la ' ler de de e riwra rwenna ray .
The king said , What honor and dignity has been given to Mordecai for this ? Then the king 's servants who attended him said , Nothing has been done for him . ||| Pede ray e natian nohora la ' hade , de rhi ' hya ' a la Mordekhai pa ra rwahla Mordekhai nhioli-liet kalwiedwedni , me rhu'ru-rhelma de emkameni la yala'ani ? Mak khima-kre ' ray re rwalolla ray riwra , E edonna nlernan ma'ta hadomdoma .
The king said , Who is in the court ? Now Haman had come into the outer court of the king 's house , to speak to the king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him . ||| Noma ray nakot la re niwra , La ' dodo'ondi de he ' etla a kruwun ge'nu ralamni dina ? Haman na'nama nmai pia ed olek la la ' a ray kruwun genni la ' rialma , yoma niwra nwak la ray pa rla rwairia Mordekhai la ' a rir tiulul muaka ha rarir tiarga olek de wa .
The king 's servants said to him , Behold , Haman stands in the court . The king said , Let him come in . ||| Pede mak khima-kre ' ray re rwalolla ray riwa , Tun raya , Haman e nmai pia niwra nora tun ray rwatroma ! Noma ray niwra , Mikot la pa nmai .
So Haman came in . The king said to him , What shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor ? Now Haman said in his heart , Who would the king delight to honor more than myself ? ||| La'pa Haman nler la rialam pa dewade ray natiana niwra , Hota la ' dodo'ondi de agiwra ghi ' a nhiu'ru-nhielam lawna la riy ida . La o wniarormu de hota agala hya ' a pa aghi ' nan emkade ? Mere la Haman wniarorni de , Hota he ' ho ' ed maka ha nakot dena ? Nahmenmen nanama a ' nianpena ed maka ray nakot de .
Haman said to the king , For the man whom the king delights to honor , let royal clothing be brought which the king uses to wear , and the horse that the king rides on , and on the head of which a royal crown is set . ||| Pede nakot la ray niwra , Tun ray , mhuopan pa riy rodia tun ray nainiar plalahwani . Ne rod walia tun ray kudni id maka ha rkeni wutu-lai la wawannu totpena riy maka ray niwra nhu'ru-nhelam la de nha'at la kud de .
Let the clothing and the horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king 's most noble princes , that they may array the man whom the king delights to honor with them , and have him ride on horseback through the city square , and proclaim before him , ‘ Thus it shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor ! ' ||| Noma o'ta-mat lawna id la ' a lodna-hair de ed maka kapola-karainia riy maka tun ray ha niwra nhu'ru-nhelam la de , nhor nianpena nala ' ulga pa nhaunu-nhaunu nohora la ' a talla leta ralamni pa niwra , Tuna ray ed maka khi ' emkadilla la ' a riy maka ha niwra nhu'ru-nhelam la de !
Then the king said to Haman , Hurry and take the clothing and the horse , as you have said , and do this for Mordecai the Jew , who sits at the king 's gate . Let nothing fail of all that you have spoken . ||| Noma ray nakot la Haman de niwra , Demade pleta-plet pa mlia mhu'ru-mhuelam la Mordekhai , riy Yahudi de . Mhi ' a hya ' honona maka omukot oleka re wa , de yana mhuoratdoin hadomdom maka omukot oleka re wa . Muala a rain plalahwanu nor wutga kud de . Hota omliernan Mordekhai la ' a nhiar liawna gaini de e namtatan reria .
Then Haman took the clothing and the horse , and arrayed Mordecai , and had him ride through the city square , and proclaimed before him , Thus it shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor ! ||| Dewade Haman nla ' pa na'ala naniair de nora kuda na'nama napola-naraini Mordekhai , nhorwua noma Mordekhai nhelia kuda hananni pa Haman ni'it la kuda talli na'nama nloha talla leta ralamni ne nhaun pa niwra , Mia mimkeka ! Tuna ray ed mak khi ' emkadilla la ' a riy maka ha niwra nhu'ru-nhelam la de !
Mordecai came back to the king 's gate , but Haman hurried to his house , mourning and having his head covered . ||| La'pa nhorwua dewade Mordekhai nawal lia la ' a nhiar liawna ray kruwungenni de owa'ana . Mere Haman nti'il doinia pa nla'awa . Nmolu-nma ' a pede npupun gaini pa nla'awa .
Haman recounted to Zeresh his wife and all his friends everything that had happened to him . Then his wise men and Zeresh his wife said to him , If Mordecai , before whom you have begun to fall , is of Jewish descent , you will not prevail against him , but you will surely fall before him . ||| Noma Haman nakot nohora la patke'eni nora rom heiwialli re honona hya ' maka ha nhi ' oleka re honona . Nhor nia'nama hawni nora rom heiwialli mak khi'inde kano ' a-ka'atga e ' a rakot la Haman riwra , Inee ! La ' dodo'ondi de Mordekhai nalernu olek o'owa , pa hota emkade pa nodi liarni . Hade de riy Yahudi ida de pede omhi ' emkameni ho'mana ta'enniana omureh ' i e ' a . E ' nanpena hota ed mak kal o ' la yawa !
While they were yet talking with him , the king 's eunuchs came , and hurried to bring Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared . ||| La'pa rtepartarlia wniahauru ma'ta dewade mak kar lia ' a ray kruwannu re rmai die rmahrur rier pia rodi Haman rla rwalliewan nohora Ester wniahihi'ini-wniayodin la ' a meini wawannu .
So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen . The king said again to Esther on the second day at the banquet of wine , What is your petition , queen Esther ? It shall be granted you . What is your request ? Even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed . ||| Nhor nioka ray nora Haman rla pa ror Ester ra'an nana re'eni wornu la ' a Ester mei wawannu . La'pa e remun reria arka noma ray natiana Ester niwra , Nara , yanpa omuiwra mukot hadom de , mukota wa ! La ' hya ' a maka ompuaka pa nahniakar worg ho'ola la ' a lodna hairi di mana , hota gala tiy o ' a .
Then Esther the queen answered , If I have found favor in your sight , O king , and if it pleases the king , let my life be given me at my petition , and my people at my request . ||| Noma ratu Ester nakot la niwra , La'pa tun ray nwayow nohora a ' u die me alia ' nana tun ray ralamni , de awuak pa agora a lu'wu-a'na wa'lu re yana rlernana wniunu-wnienna .
For we are sold , I and my people , to be destroyed , to be slain , and to perish . But if we had been sold for male and female slaves , I would have held my peace , although the adversary could not have compensated for the king 's loss . ||| Yoma agor wut nieka a lu'wu-a'na wa'lu re honona de ha yaweli-yapar oleka am pia pa hota rwunu-rwenna doin meman ami . Mere la'pa ra'olga am pia rhi ' am lia ata-wa'ara de awuarora de hade edon nhi ' hadoma , ne a ' muana hota a ' g edonna mua ukot nohora owa'an la tun ray pa tun ray nwarora rupni-rupni . Mere la ' hadi de hota rwunu-rwenan momuog ami !
Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the queen , Who is he , and where is he who dared presume in his heart to do so ? ||| Dewade ray Aswerus natiana ratu Ester niwra , He ' nparan pia nhi ' emkade tiy miy ? Riy de etla hanme ?
Esther said , An adversary and an enemy , even this wicked Haman ! Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen . ||| Noma Ester niwra , Haman e orgahani mak kamtatan di . Merni-metamni e inhatti maka khi ' am lia arwalli , me e ' ed maka knahora-knala ' ami ! Dewade Haman namta'at nande gaini nwahra la ray nora ratu gaini ralamni .
The king arose in his wrath from the banquet of wine and went into the palace garden . Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen , for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king . ||| Ray nahankeran nande naprir dioin la mei maka e nemun reria arka la , ne nlergot wa , pa nla'awa la kruwun genni walli tio'ora . Haman nat muemna de ray hota nwaror oleka pa nwunu-nwen e ' a , pede Haman edonna nwarei lia ' a ratu Ester onni , totpena nwak pa Ester nalewn e ' a .
Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the banquet of wine , and Haman had fallen on the couch where Esther was . Then the king said , Will he even assault the queen in front of me in the house ? As the word went out of the king 's mouth , they covered Haman 's face . ||| Haman namta'at pa narieiniande nhoplia inonni la ' a Ester lew ku'uni wawannu pa niwra nwak pa Ester nhuria e la ' a hal wawna . Mere la'pa nhoplia inonni la ' Ester lew ku'unu wawannu maka Ester etla wawannu dewade ray mana nhu'ru walia nmai rialam pa. La'pa nkillia Haman de la ' Ester lewnu de wawannu , noma ray nkamota pa niwra , Hya ' a ? Ha nparan pia niwra naga'aga ratu la handi la a ga'yu ralamni mai a kruwunge'nu di memna ? ! La'pa ray nakot emkade , dewade mak khima-kre ' a ray re rmai pia rpupnia Haman gaini .
Then Harbonah , one of the eunuchs who were with the king , said , Behold , the gallows fifty cubits high , which Haman has made for Mordecai , who spoke good for the king , is standing at Haman 's house . The king said , Hang him on it ! ||| Noma mak khima-kre ' a ray id de mak kwawa Harbona nakot la ray niwra , Tun ray , la ' a Haman romni onni de orgahani enarir tiarg oleka rira liawair geni id de tullu metra terampworu wehrani wolima pa niwra hota nla nwairia Mordekhai maka kalewan nana oleka tun ray la ' a ler de loo ! Dewade ray nal titni de niwra , Mlia mpiairia Haman la ' a riri die hananni !
So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai . Then the king 's wrath was pacified . ||| Pede rla rwair wenna Haman la ' a riri liawair maka ha nhi ' a pa niwra nla nwairia Mordekhai . La'pa rhi ' emkade na'nama ray Aswerus hankeranni namdiaru .
On that day , King Ahasuerus gave the house of Haman , the Jews ' enemy , to Esther the queen . Mordecai came before the king , for Esther had told what he was to her . ||| La ' ler de meman pa ray Aswerus nala Haman , riy Yahudi arwalli mak kmati oleka de re'eni-tniarnu nor wutga hopopani-lili'irnu me tani la'pa hare honona maka Haman gahani re la ' a ratu Ester . Ester nakot nohor walia Mordekhai la ' ray , niwra enor Mordekhai die de rwa'ina-rwanara pede la'awa ler de noma Ray npolga Mordekhai pa nmai .
The king took off his ring , which he had taken from Haman , and gave it to Mordecai . Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman . ||| Noma ray naul dioinia kdielli mak kodi ray plolli-mneheni . Kdiel de ed maka ray na ' nan owa'an la Haman de pa nala la Mordekhai nnairia . Ne Ester nrana Mordekhai pa nodi plolli la ' a hare honona maka Haman gahani re .
Esther spoke yet again before the king , and fell down at his feet and begged him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite , and his plan that he had planned against the Jews . ||| Nhorwua noma Ester nhoplia inonni la ray lakni noma nkakur pa nwak lilili-mamuau lia ray niwra , Mtiulan pa mhuria ralammu totpena yan muod niohora Haman , Agag duratni-waitni de wniarora-wnialaini maka ha nakot oleka wa de hota rwunu-rwenan momuoga luwu-a'na Yahudi re honona .
Then the king held out to Esther the golden scepter . So Esther arose , and stood before the king . ||| Dewade ray nrana lie'eni mahani la ' Ester . Noma Ester naprir pia nakot la niwra ,
She said , If it pleases the king , and if I have found favor in his sight , and the thing seems right to the king , and I am pleasing in his eyes , let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman , the son of Hammedatha the Agagite , which he wrote to destroy the Jews who are in all the king 's provinces . ||| La'pa alia ' nan tun ray ralamni de , me tun ray nwayow nan a wakwa'ku di yoma tun ray la'pa nwarora de talan plollol inhat hade , de tun ray nalgota horta-hairi ida totpena nherun doin horat maka Haman nhi ' nan de pa na nakot nohora hota ha rwunu-rwenna luwu-a'na Yahudi mai lodna-hair di .
For how can I endure to see the evil that would come to my people ? How can I endure to see the destruction of my relatives ? ||| Hota awuarora emkameni la a ralmu la'pa umkek rer nieka a i'nu-na'ru ror wut nieka hu'wu-woinu re rwunu-rwenna la a ga'yu ralamni ? !
Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew , See , I have given Esther the house of Haman , and they have hanged him on the gallows because he laid his hand on the Jews . ||| Noma ray Aswerus nakot la ratu Ester nora Mordekhai makden Yahudi de niwra , Plola a ' g ed maka kla wairi Haman , yoma eniwra nkuhi-nho'ora riy Yahudi rella ne agal oleka e gahani hya ' a-hya ' a honona la ' a Ester wa .
Write also to the Jews as it pleases you , in the king 's name , and seal it with the king 's ring , for the writing which is written in the king 's name , and sealed with the king 's ring , may not be reversed by any man . ||| Nah , dodo'ondi de a ' g ed mak khopan pa mial horat totpena riy Yahudi re ramori-ralewna , de plolli nek la ha mimkeka pa samoga de mhiorta la ' horat de ralamni . Miala na'nu me mniairia a kdie'lu de pa mkenia lodna-hairi ya'udalli cap . Yoma horta-hairi maka ha ralgot de e rwet hadella ray nanni , me la ' walia ray ed maka ka'udlia kdielli la ' a horat de pa hota taken niana rhernia owa'an horat de .
Then the king 's scribes were called at that time , in the third month , which is the month Sivan , on the twenty-third day of the month , and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded to the Jews , and to the local governors , and the governors and princes of the provinces which are from India to Ethiopia , one hundred twenty-seven provinces , to every province according to its writing , and to every people in their language , and to the Jews in their writing , and in their language . ||| La ler de nekpa la ' wolla wotellu , maka ha rweta la wolla Siwan , la lerni terampworu wehrani wotellu , de Mordekhai npolga makhorat ray horatni-hairni na'nama nhopan pa rhorta horta la gubernura re rora o'ta-mata la ' a propinsi rahu ida terampworu wehrani wo'itu re la nwau lia India pa nla ntut lia Etiopia . Horta re , de rhorta la propinsi re nor leta-leta honona re rima-rima yawalli ror wutga nhioratni wamueheni . Rhorat walia horta rella la ' a riy Yahudi re honona de rnairia ir yawalli nor wutga ira nhioratni .
He wrote in the name of King Ahasuerus , and sealed it with the king 's ring , and sent letters by courier on horseback , riding on royal horses that were bred from swift steeds . ||| Mordekhai nalgota horat de nwet la ray nanni ne nnairi ray kdielli pa ntapal wut wualia lodna-hairi hiwliai la horta re cap kerajaan . Nhorwua de Mordekhai nhopan pa mak ha rtut niana pa rodi horta , pa rla rottiarga la propinsi re honona de rnairia ray kud wamueheni mak kawlari mermerni .
In those letters , the king granted the Jews who were in every city to gather themselves together and to defend their lives-to destroy , to kill , and to cause to perish all the power of the people and province that would assault them , their little ones and women , and to plunder their possessions , ||| La ' horta re lirni de e riwra ray orgahani e nhuria olek lirni pa riy Yahudi makden la ' leta-leta re rawoka pa rod nian inonni . Ne la'pa hameni to ' pa mak kwatiawua luwnu-a'na la ' a propinsi meni-meni to ' a , rmai pia rnairia keki-rautu pa riwra rwahak ya'arni la makden Yahudi re de , de hota Yahudi re rora la ya'ara totpena rwunu-rwenan wutga hawni-a'nani re honona nampena reyahru momuoga re'eni-tniarnu re .
on one day in all the provinces of King Ahasuerus , on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month , which is the month Adar . ||| Ler maka Yahudi re hota rod nian inonni la ' a propinsi meni-meni la ' a Aswerus lodanni-hairni de , de la ' a lera-mela termida wehrani wotellu la ' a wolla termida wehrani woru die , maka ha rwet la wolla Adar de .
A copy of the letter , that the decree should be given out in every province , was published to all the peoples , that the Jews should be ready for that day to avenge themselves on their enemies . ||| Horta-hair maka ha rtapla hiwliwi lia de rala pa rwewar la propinsi re liewnu honona totpena luwu-a'na honona re ratga , totpena riy Yahudi re mana rta'wa matni re la arwalli maka kneltiarg olek de pa rma rwahak ya'ara la ' ler de .
So the couriers who rode on royal horses went out , hastened and pressed on by the king 's commandment . The decree was given out in the citadel of Susa . ||| Dewade mak kodia horta-hairi re radil doin la ror wutga kudni re onnila ray nhiopanni pa rhakre'era la Babel propinsi honona . Ne la ' letlawna Susan de mana rpaikia horat de pa rakot nohor walia hihi ' a-yapyap die .
Mordecai went out of the presence of the king in royal clothing of blue and white , and with a great crown of gold , and with a robe of fine linen and purple , and the city of Susa shouted and was glad . ||| La'pa nhorwua noma Mordekhai nhoitio'or la ray ne nlergot wa nnairia wutu-lai miaha mak sapona . Ennair walia raini motmota me wawahra emekwalima maka ray nhi'inde rnairia , nor wut nieka rain plalahwani maka ha rhi ' a la koka mnurnuhru maka ponpona . La'pa makden la leta Susan liewnu de ratlin nan horat de lirni dewade rahepur nohora .
The Jews had light , gladness , joy , and honor . ||| Riy Yahudi makden hande mana ramuki-rahepur nohor memna .
In every province and in every city , wherever the king 's commandment and his decree came , the Jews had gladness , joy , a feast and a holiday . Many from among the peoples of the land became Jews , for the fear of the Jews had fallen on them . ||| Yahudi re la ' a propinsi la ' a meni-meni to ' a mak katlinan olek horat re lirni rahepur memna pa rhi ' a ya'an lawna-yemun lawna . Me Yahudi atia ' mana rler wut lia Yahudi mutnu yoma ramta'at wenna Yahudi re mutnu .
Now in the twelfth month , which is the month Adar , on the thirteenth day of the month , when the king 's commandment and his decree came near to be put in execution , on the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to conquer them , but it turned out that the opposite happened , that the Jews conquered those who hated them , ||| La'pa ntutu-nte ' meman la wolla termida wehrani wornu de wolla Adar , la ' a lera termida wehrani wotellu . La ' ler de ed maka hota ha rhi ' nohora ray titni . La ' ler de Yahudi arwalli re riwra rodi plolli la riy Yahudi re . Mere la'pa nwaldioinia noma riy Yahudi nanpena maka karehi ir la ' a ar ralamni .
the Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the provinces of the King Ahasuerus , to lay hands on those who wanted to harm them . No one could withstand them , because the fear of them had fallen on all the people . ||| La ' leta-leta re honona la ' a ray Aswerus lodanni-hairni de , riy Yahudi rawok pa rna'ohma totpena rtutria riy meni mak kiwra kwunu-kwenna ira . Luwu-a'na la ' meni-meni to ' pa takeni ral ir la ' yawa yoma ramta'at nande rmakuk tiarga .
All the princes of the provinces , the local governors , the governors , and those who did the king 's business helped the Jews , because the fear of Mordecai had fallen on them . ||| Nahmenmen nanama o'ta-mat la luwu-a'na re honona makden la propinsi me o'ta-mat makden la ' a bupati ne la ' walia gubernur-gubernur la ' a lodna-hairi rwaldioinia pa rhima-rre ' owa'an riy Yahudi re yoma ramta'at la Mordekhai .
For Mordecai was great in the king 's house , and his fame went out throughout all the provinces , for the man Mordecai grew greater and greater . ||| Yoma Mordekhai di de riy inponni la ' a kruwun genni me makden la ' a lodna-hairi liewnu de ratg oleka Mordekhai nanpena ed maka ktorna-kraut la ' a ray kruwungenni de pahna berkuasa . Ne e plolli-mneheni de e na'ititar rer lia liawanni .
The Jews struck all their enemies with the stroke of the sword , and with slaughter and destruction , and did what they wanted to those who hated them . ||| Emkadella la ' a plolli nek la riy Yahudi hihi'ini-yapyapni la ' a ir arwalli honona , ne rhapartiklia pa edonna rlewan la wehla ara gai liokarni .
In the citadel of Susa , the Jews killed and destroyed five hundred men . ||| La ' a kruwun genni onni la ' leta Susan de , nek de riy Yahudi rwenan nana riy rahu wolima .
They killed Parshandatha , Dalphon , Aspatha , Poratha , Adalia , Aridatha , Parmashta , Arisai , Aridai , and Vaizatha , the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha , the Jews ' enemy , but they did n't lay their hand on the plunder . ||| Maka ha rwenna re , de e rwenan nan walia Haman upni-a'nani muanke ' a riy termida . Haman di de Hamedata upni-a'nani makla ' riy Yahudi arwalli re . Ne Haman a'na muanke ' termida mak ha rwenan nana re de nanni de Parsandata , Dalfon , Aspata , Porata , Adalia , Aridata , Parmasta , Arisai , Aridai , me Waisata . Mere la ' ar de ralamni de riy Yahudi id mana edonna reyahru hadomdoma .
On that day , the number of those who were slain in the citadel of Susa was brought before the king . ||| La ' ler de wal pia rmai pia rodia kot la ray , la ' a riy wo'ir maka ha rwunu-rwenan nan oleka la Susan kruwungenni onni de .
The king said to Esther the queen , The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in the citadel of Susa , including the ten sons of Haman , what then have they done in the rest of the king 's provinces ! Now what is your petition ? It shall be granted you . What is your further request ? It shall be done . ||| Noma tun ray nakot la ratu Ester niwra , Mai Susan kruwungenni onni di nmeh ' a nek de riy Yahudi rwen oleka riy rahu wolimpa , ne e rwenan wut wualia Haman a'nani riy termida re . Hya ' ho'ame la ' a propinsi korni ho ' a , de matialo'onama rhi ' emkade wal lia hande . Nara , hya ' maka hota ha mpuak owa'an mai a ' u , yan mumta'ata nara ! Hota gala re !
Then Esther said , If it pleases the king , let it be granted to the Jews who are in Susa to do tomorrow also according to today 's decree , and let Haman 's ten sons be hanged on the gallows . ||| Noma Ester nwahla lirni niwra , La'pa tuna nwayow de , riy Yahudi mak kden la Susan di , de repar ir rhi ' owa'an la ' a hya ' maka ha rhi ' a la ler di , mere hota rhi ' a la letlawna Susan uhunu-ewatni . Me totpena ra'ala Haman upni-a'nani maka ha rwenan nan oleka re pa rla rwairi la ' a riri au liawair geni re .
The king commanded this to be done . A decree was given out in Susa , and they hanged Haman 's ten sons . ||| Dewade ray nleretniekla nal titni pa rhi ' a hya ' maka Ester ha nwaka la ray , noma horta hiwliai ralgota totpa makden la Susan rwahi ' a-rwayod pia ra'ara , me Haman a'nani termida mak ha rwenan nana re de rla rwair momuoga re !
The Jews who were in Susa gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar , and killed three hundred men in Susa , but they did n't lay their hand on the plunder . ||| La'pa repar pa la ' wolla Adar lerni termida wehrani wogat wa noma Yahudi re rawokwok owa'an pa rwunu-rwen nan owa'an riy rahu wotelu la let Susan uhunu-ewatni de neka , mere edonna reyahru hadomdom la ' let de ralamni .
The other Jews who were in the king 's provinces gathered themselves together , defended their lives , had rest from their enemies , and killed seventy-five thousand of those who hated them , but they did n't lay their hand on the plunder . This was done on the thirteenth day of the month Adar , and on the fourteenth day of that month they rested and made it a day of feasting and gladness . ||| Ne la ' a wolla Adar lerni termida wehrani wotellu de riy Yahudi maka kden la ' a propinsi re honona mana rawokwok wal pia rod nian inonni la yawunu-ya'ara totpena yana ir arwalli re rhi ' yatyatni la ira . Ne irwunu-rwenan nan arwalli riy riwnu terampwo'itu wehrani wolima . Mere edonna reyahru arwalli hyonni-hyanni . Wniunu-wnienan lawan de , la ' a wolla Adar lerni termida wehrani wotellu . Mere la'awa repar pa wolla lerni termida wehrani wogat wa dewade ir edonna rwunu-rwenna rimormior wia mere nrena pa ramuki-rahepur rhi ' ya'anlawna-yemunlawna la ' a ler de .
But the Jews who were in Susa assembled together on the thirteenth and on the fourteenth days of the month , and on the fifteenth day of that month , they rested , and made it a day of feasting and gladness . ||| Mere la ' a letlawna Susan de riy Yahudi ramuki-rahepur rhi ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna la ' a lera termida wehrani wolimni la ' wolan de ralamni , de emaknekama lerlalawna ida , yoma rwunu-rwen oleka arwalli la ' a lera termida wehrani wotellu me la ' walia lera termida wehrani wogatni la ' wolan de , na'nama rwair la ara la ' a lera termida wehrani wolimni la ' wolan de wali .
Therefore the Jews of the villages , who live in the unwalled towns , make the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and feasting , a holiday , and a day of sending presents of food to one another . ||| Mere makden la ' a let kuku ' a rhi ' a wniunu-wnienan lawna la ' a wolla lerni termida wehrani wotellu demade ramuki-rahepur nohora la ' a lerni termida wehrani wogatni . La ' hade pede riy Yahudi makden la let kuke ' a re rhoratreria wolla Adar lerni termida wehrani wogata pa ramuki-rahepur nohora , me idma nara ' a-napalg id la ' a ya'ana-yemnu .
Mordecai wrote these things , and sent letters to all the Jews who were in all the provinces of the King Ahasuerus , both near and far , ||| La'pa ha rhorwua dewade Mordekhai nhorat tar momuoga hare honona la ' a puka id ralamni na'nama nhi ' horta pa na'enyatga la riy Yahudi re honona la ' a ray Aswerus lodanni-hairni uhunu-ewatni-ewatni-lahwani .
to enjoin them that they should keep the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month Adar yearly , ||| Horat de lirni de totpena la'awa la ' wolla Adar lerni termida wehrani wogatni me wehrani wolimni , de rhoratreria pa rhi ' a ler maroro ' a rella la ' a lerlalawna , la ' anni-anni .
as the days in which the Jews had rest from their enemies , and the month which was turned to them from sorrow to gladness , and from mourning into a holiday , that they should make them days of feasting and gladness , and of sending presents of food to one another , and gifts to the needy . ||| Yoma la lera-mella re ed maka irareh niana ira arwalli pa nhi'nande ir luini-nuhranu me mehrani-maunu nwaltiargho'ola lewliewru-tartiarni nora muki-hepru . Hade ed mak kariei pia nhi'inde ramuki-rahepur la ' a lera re , me rhi ' a ya'anlawna-yemunlawna me la ' walia rod wialia rira wra ' u nhioini , nor wutga rodia limtut lia ' a a'na riy patyata .
The Jews accepted the custom that they had begun , as Mordecai had written to them , ||| Riy Yahudi honona re ratu rhu'ru-rhelam la Mordekhai lirni-tunnu mak ha nakota , pede rhi ' a lera he ' i-hepru maka ha rakot oleka re de emekwalima ira deullu-tatarni la ' a anni-anni .
because Haman the son of Hammedatha , the Agagite , the enemy of all the Jews , had plotted against the Jews to destroy them , and had cast Pur , that is the lot , to consume them and to destroy them , ||| Yoma ir rareh nian oleka ir arwalli Haman , Hamadata a'nani la ' a Agag duratni-waitni de maka nhi'inde kora riy Yahudi honona emeknekama hunkadkiadia . E ' ed mak kwaror pa kiwra kwunnu-kwenna riy Yahudi honona . Nwahedg oleka lotre totpena ret tiar lia ler maka ha riwra rwunu-rwenna riy Yahudi re . Lotre di nhi'inde makden hande ha rweta la purim .
but when this became known to the king , he commanded by letters that his wicked plan , which he had planned against the Jews , should return on his own head , and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows . ||| Mere la'pa ray natlin nan nohora hade noma ray nala horta maka ha rnairia hiwliai lia , pa narieiniande Haman wniaror yatyat de ntuin tar targho'ola Haman nor a'na wamueheni re . Ne ir er maka klernan ira liawair geni hananni .
Therefore they called these days Purim , from the word Pur . Therefore because of all the words of this letter , and of that which they had seen concerning this matter , and that which had come to them , ||| Lotre maka Haman nnairia re de rweta la purim . La ' hade pede la ' a lerlalawna re , de makden Yahudi re rweta la Purim . Mordekhai horatni me la ' walia hya ' maka riy Yahudi ha rlernana me ramkek oleka
the Jews established and imposed on themselves , on their descendants , and on all those who joined themselves to them , so that it should not fail that they would keep these two days according to what was written and according to its appointed time every year , ||| ed mak katota-kariei niande ir orgahi rmeh ' a rhi ' nan owa'ana riora-liai id owa'an la ' a ir rora duratni-waitni , me la ' walia riy honona maka kiwra kler wut lia riy Yahudi luwnu-a'nani . La ' a riora-liai miaka ha rhi'nande hota la ' anni-anin nekpa ir honona ramuki-hahepur la ' lera rora maka Mordekhai e nror targ oleka re wa .
and that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation , every family , every province , and every city , and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews , nor their memory perish from their offspring . ||| Erakot tar wualia de la ' lera Purim de de riy Yahudi rora duratni-waitni honona yana rhoratdoinia yahe ' i-yahepru la pa nodia pa noh niata . Me makden Yahudi honona la ' a luwu-a'na honona , la ' a leta-leta re honona la'pa propinsi re honona mana yana rhoratreria yahe ' i-yahepru la ' ler de la'pa nodi liarni .
Then Esther the queen , the daughter of Abihail , and Mordecai the Jew wrote with all authority to confirm this second letter of Purim . ||| Noma Ester , Abihaila a'nani de nnairi e plolli-mneheni pa emeka ratu pa nhi ' a horta id owa'ana . Nor wutga Mordekhai riy Yahudi die rhort owa'an horta id totpena rhi ' aruri horat maka Mordekhai ha nhi ' a de pa na nakot nohora lerlalawna Purim .
He sent letters to all the Jews in the hundred twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus with words of peace and truth , ||| Ra'enyatga horat rella la ' a riy Yahudi honona la ' a propinsi rahu ida terampworu wehrani wo'itu makden la ' a ray Aswerus lodanni-hairni . Rhi ' a horta re de rwaka totpena riy Yahudi re rmori-rdar lia kalwiedni-paitiotni , de ernairi lir mak kaplollola .
to confirm these days of Purim in their appointed times , as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had decreed , and as they had imposed upon themselves and their descendants in the matter of the fastings and their mourning . ||| La ' horat de , de eriwra Yahudi re la ' meni-meni to ' de hota retlia pa ir ror walia ira duratni-waitni yana rhoratdoinia rahe ' i-rahepur la ' lera-lera Purim , la ' ler maka Mordekhai nora ratu Ester rakot oleka de la ' horatni ralamni . Ne hota ramuki-rahepru la lera maroro ' a re la ' a anni-anni nekpa rlernohora hya ' maka nhi'inde Yahudi re rhi ' nohora oleka la ' lera-lera re maka ha rtutg olek pa ratahan lara nora raluli-rahona , totpena rpolu-rwak la Uplerlawna .
The commandment of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim , and it was written in the book . ||| Ester horatni de narur niana Mordekhai horatni mak kakot nohora Purim riorni-liaini , ne ratu Ester nhopan pa rhorta riora-liai re la ' a lodna-hairi pukni ralamni .
King Ahasuerus laid a tribute on the land and on the islands of the sea . ||| Ray Aswerus nhopan pa limni-rorni honona rpairi blastena , de edonna ntot nan to ' a riy maka kholi-kletla la noha gaini , mere nawniatniat momuoga leta-ruhuna honona , makden la enhu'ula-ga ' laini , pa nwewar la ' a makden la wo'ora-kawru .
Are n't all the acts of his power and of his might , and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai , to which the king advanced him , written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia ? ||| Ne rhorat targa la lodna-hairi Persia rora Media pukni ralamni la ' a hare honona maka ray de nhi ' nana de nodia preheni-mkaini inponni . Me rhorat tar wual momuoga la ' a Mordekhai nla ' a o'ta-mata tutulu-pepetna la lodna-hair die , onnila ray Aswerus nran e ' a .
For Mordecai the Jew was next to King Ahasuerus , and great among the Jews and accepted by the multitude of his brothers , seeking the good of his people and speaking peace to all his descendants . ||| Mordekhai riy Yahudi miaka ha rrana pa ktorna-krauti olek de , eneknek to'ama natlin la ray Aswerus . E ' de genni-tienni nareh dioin makden Yahudi re honona . Mere makden Yahudi re ratu rhu'ru-rhelam nohor la Mordekhai yoma honona ralamni rapliorlior la ' nohwalli de . Yoma Mordekhai die nkar toto ' meman pa namkek la ' a e nohwalli honona re mormiorni-dardiarni totpena rler la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
Now the LORD 's word came to Jonah the son of Amittai , saying , ||| La ' lera ida , plinu-plinnianama ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nhar lirni pa nakot la Yunus , Amitai a'nani de ,
Arise , go to Nineveh , that great city , and preach against it , for their wickedness has come up before me . ||| Niwra , Yunus ee ! Pleta-pleta pa mlia'awa la ' letlawna de mak ha rweta la Niniwe , pa mukot la ira de hota Agukmua re yoma Agat niohora makden Niniwe re yatni-halli lawan rehi ' a .
But Jonah rose up to flee to Tarshish from the presence of the LORD . He went down to Joppa , and found a ship going to Tarshish , so he paid its fare , and went down into it , to go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the LORD . ||| Mere Yunus nahmena nlernohora pede nawlar targho'ola pa nokria Tarsis totpena olieta la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A . La ' noma enlola leta Yopa . La ' hande nlernana kapli id niwra nwair watnu pa nokria Tarsis . Noma nleretniekla npair doinia kapli siewni pa nlernohora a'na kapli pa rokria Tarsis totpena olieta la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A .
But the LORD sent out a great wind on the sea , and there was a mighty storm on the sea , so that the ship was likely to break up . Then the mariners were afraid , and every man cried to his god . They threw the cargo that was in the ship into the sea to lighten the ship . But Jonah had gone down into the innermost parts of the ship and he was laying down , and was fast asleep . ||| La'pa kapli nwaran wa dewade Yunus nerun la la ' kapli wikwikni na'nama nanin hala . Edon nalo'on wali ne ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nala anin lawna pa nreiniande kakmoran lawna niwra nweyata-nwaniaga kapil de . A'na kapli re rdiwra-rda'al nande rpolpuol inni-rwakwak amni la ' a rima-rima uplerni-upmatni . Noma rte'la la yohya ' makden la kapli wawannu pa rhopliergernia totpena kapli nahgali pa nariana .
So the ship master came to him , and said to him , What do you mean , sleeper ? Arise , call on your God ! Maybe your God will notice us , so that we wo n't perish . ||| La'pa yormudi la kapil de nerun pa nla namkek la kapli wikni , de nhortiut niana Yunus e naninhala la hande . Noma yormudi de nakot la Yunus niwra , Hoi ! Emkameni la o wniaromu pede o mumkek reria anin lawan di mana o ' emuni'nu mai handina ? ! Mumat pa mpuolu-mpuak tek la la ' a o uplermu totpena yanpa e sniayanni demade itler targho'ola kalwiedwedni .
They all said to each other , Come ! Let 's cast lots , that we may know who is responsible for this evil that is on us . So they cast lots , and the lot fell on Jonah . ||| La'pa Yunus nor yormudi de rha'at la heyanan wa , noma a'na kapli idma nakot la ida riwra , Mai pia it twahedge lotre undi lia it hononita totpena tat muemna he ' ed mak khala pede itler la kropna-krieutu mak emkadi ! La'pa rwahedga lotre wa noma rhed niana la Yunus limni ralamni .
Then they asked him , Tell us , please , for whose cause this evil is on us . What is your occupation ? Where do you come from ? What is your country ? Of what people are you ? ||| Noma honona ratiana Yunus riwra , Hota he ' hihi'ini ed mak karei piede itler la kropan lawan dina ? O kniarmu hya ' a ? Ompuatiawu hanmeni ? Hya ' noha mniotni me luwnu-a'nani meni o ' pede omua muor amtialla ?
He said to them , I am a Hebrew , and I fear the LORD , the God of heaven , who has made the sea and the dry land . ||| Noma Yunus nwalolla niwra , A ' di de riy Ibrani miaka kkola tieru-kawur nehla la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A de Uplerlawna makdella Ilyamou-Watyatoha . E ' ed mak kakoki-kayap niana gera-tahi ' la'pa nohkerna-rai miaran di honona .
Then the men were exceedingly afraid , and said to him , What have you done ? For the men knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the LORD , because he had told them . ||| Me nwahaur momuoga hya ' ed mak karei pia enawlar dioinia inonni la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A . La ' a'na kapli re ratlin nana hya ' maka ha nwahauru re de honona ema rtaplele'er targa ne rdiwra-rda'al nohora yamta'atni , pa rakot la Yunus riwra , Riy yatyat id o ' di lee ! Hya ' mak karei piede omhi ' nan emkadena ? !
Then they said to him , What shall we do to you , that the sea may be calm to us ? For the sea grew more and more stormy . ||| La'pa rtepartarlia yaltieri mere yeher to'ama kakmor lahu orloi-orta'ara lol walli-walli pede rakot la Yunus riwra , Inee ! Hota amhi ' emkameni la o ' a totpena kakmoran di nalina-nalera ?
He said to them , Take me up , and throw me into the sea . Then the sea will be calm for you , for I know that because of me this great storm is on you . ||| Noma Yunus nwalolla re niwra , Mpialiakar nek alia la ' a hletan lawan di wa , totpena nalina-nalera . Yoma agat memna la a ' g ed mak karei piede mimlier hletan lawan maka kayo'ora-ka'anin di .
Nevertheless the men rowed hard to get them back to the land , but they could not , for the sea grew more and more stormy against them . ||| Mere la'pa nakot emkade ho'mana a'na kapli re rodia rur miatmiata la wniain nohor la kapli pa rler la liwu ralamni rler la keranni . Hade ho'mana taken niana rler la hande , yoma yeher to'ama yo'or tutulu ema rkanaini-rkanainia pa nwakloli-nwaklalia ir la kapli .
Therefore they cried to the LORD , and said , We beg you , LORD , we beg you , do n't let us die for this man 's life , and do n't lay on us innocent blood , for you , LORD , have done as it pleased you . ||| La ' hade pede honona re rpolu-rwak la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A riwra , Orgahi-Oraha'anu ne ! Ampolu-ampak pa yan Mual am pia amler la matmiati-molmuolu yoma hota amakwara riy di nhiwni . Yanpa riy di edon nhala . Mere ampakwak pa yana Mukmua ami , Orgahiya ! Yoma Orgahi-Orha'anu ne , O orghamu ed maka khi ' oleka hya ' maka orgahamu Mpuaror nana .
So they took up Jonah and threw him into the sea , and the sea ceased its raging . ||| Dewade ra'ala Yunus pa ratrernia la hletan lawna ralamni . Dewade nalina-nalera .
Then the men feared the LORD exceedingly , and they offered a sacrifice to the LORD and made vows . ||| Honona re rleretniekla ramta'at wenna la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A , ne rala hoihoi-tantiani la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A me rakot targa de hota rhi ' hadomdom pa rhi ' amikria ORGAHI-ORHA ' A ralamni .
Then Jonah prayed to the LORD , his God , out of the fish 's belly . ||| La ' a up wornu apannu ralamni de Yunus nsumbain la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A , e Uplerlawanni
He said , I called because of my affliction to the LORD . He answered me . Out of the belly of Sheol I cried . You heard my voice . ||| niwra , Orgahi-Orha'anu ne ! A ' g etla klieratni di pa apuol oleka tiy O ' a , ne Mpuahla nan a li'ru . A ' g etla noh mati-rai miolu pa awuaka tniulan tiy O ' a . Ne Mhueri tlinmu-mpual miatmu olek la ' a a polpuo'lu .
For you threw me into the depths , in the heart of the seas . The flood was all around me . All your waves and your billows passed over me . ||| O ed maka kwaliakra alia la ' a geni kdieldelma la ' a hletan lawna wikwikni . Gera tahi ' nora wawuau liawna rado ' y a ' u . Yo'or tah ' i lawna mak Omuala re nwakloli-nwaklali a ' u .
I said , ‘ I have been banished from your sight , yet I will look again toward your holy temple . ' ||| Awuaror la ' a ralmu giwra , ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nhokr olek alia la ' E gaini ralamni we ! Mere hota alina-muat owa'an la E roma nayanni mak kmou-kwitna dena !
The waters surrounded me , even to the soul . The deep was around me . The weeds were wrapped around my head . ||| La'pa tahi ' lola tieru de a ' g etlia hletna-yoiri letgara-mneneheni . Illu-retre'eta nawniotra-natniallia la ' a o'tu .
I went down to the bottoms of the mountains . The earth barred me in forever , yet you have brought my life up from the pit , LORD my God . When my soul fainted within me , I remembered the LORD . My prayer came in to you , into your holy temple . ||| Awuakliolli erun la ' wo'or tutulu nayanni la ' a noha wikni-ray gerni . Awuarora de alier olek la noha mati-rai miolu me hota a ' g edon liergot owa'ana yoma pinta puohrani erayahro'pa pa nodi liarni . La'pa nhi'pa awaran doin a arnu na'nama aghoratna'nu pa a puol tiy O ' a , Orgahi-Orha'anu ne ! Dewade a sniumbainu de O e Mutlin reria la ' a O genmu-tienmu mak kmou-kwitna . Dewade O ' orgahamu ed maka kamori-kalewan a lia ' noha mati-rai miolu . Oo ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Uplerlawnu nee !
Those who regard vain idols forsake their own mercy . ||| Riy mak kden rer lia kniola tieru-niawur nehla la hya ' mak kakleha ruri-lai , de la ' a uplera-upmati , rawlar dioin olek O ' o wa , mak ktutga O ralam kalwiedmu la ' a rimormiori !
But I will sacrifice to you with the voice of thanksgiving . I will pay that which I have vowed . Salvation belongs to the LORD . ||| Mere a ' di de hota agal hoihoi-tantiani la ' O ' a de awuatunu-wahniar pa ga'uli-uwed re'ru . Ne la ' a hya ' maka a ' g wuettar tiy O ' a de hota gala . ORGAHI-ORHA ' A , plollolli de O ' inhatta ed maka kamori-kalewn rimormiori .
Then the LORD spoke to the fish , and it vomited out Jonah on the dry land . ||| Nhorwua dewade ORGAHI-ORHA ' A ed mak khopan pa worunlawan de nadewar gota Yunus la ' a keranni .
The LORD 's word came to Jonah the second time , saying , ||| Noma ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nhar lirni la re'eni wornu la ' a Yunus .
Arise , go to Nineveh , that great city , and preach to it the message that I give you . ||| Niwra , Yunus pleta-plet pa mlia'awa la Niniwe , la letlawan de , pa mukot nohora ir la hya ' maka A'ukot tiy o ' a re .
So Jonah arose , and went to Nineveh , according to the LORD 's word . Now Nineveh was an exceedingly great city , three days ' journey across . ||| Noma Yunus natlin la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A lirni pa nler pa nla'awa la Niniwe . Let de let sapon lawna id hade . Pede la'pa itiwra tawloh nana hota tala ' a la lera wotelu memna .
Jonah began to enter into the city a day 's journey , and he cried out , and said , In forty days , Nineveh will be overthrown ! ||| La ' ler tetema id ralamni de Yunus nala ' pa nlola let de plahwani , na'nama nharlini pa nakot nohora Uplerlawna lirni niwra , Tre ' ma'ta lera terampwogat pa hota Niniwe namkoha-namnanni !
The people of Nineveh believed God , and they proclaimed a fast and put on sackcloth , from their greatest even to their least . ||| Noma let de mniotni rpesiaya Uplerlawna nnio'oni de . Dewade leta mniotni honona retlia pa hota honona ratahan ya'ana , me kuku'uni-lalawanni rnairia rainia yaluli-yahona totpena rtutga de iriwra rhoitio'or doini-rtahnei dioin ir do'oni-halli .
The news reached the king of Nineveh , and he arose from his throne , took off his royal robe , covered himself with sackcloth , and sat in ashes . ||| La'pa ray Ninwe natlin tutga kot de dewade nerun la liwangenni . Noma no'lu doinia rain lawna lodna-hairi , na'nama nohga rain yaluli-yahona la inonni , me namtatna la awu li'ina wawannu .
He made a proclamation and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles , saying , Let neither man nor animal , herd nor flock , taste anything , let them not feed , nor drink water , ||| Noma nala tita ida me nhopan pa riy rla rakot nohora riwra , Tit di de ray Ninwe nora mentrini re ed mak kalgota . De totpena rimormior rora nhiurni-wnia'anni honona la ' let di de yan ra'ana-remnia hadomdoma .
but let them be covered with sackcloth , both man and animal , and let them cry mightily to God . Yes , let them turn everyone from his evil way and from the violence that is in his hands . ||| Rimormiori rnairia naniayarni la inonni mak ktutga de rhoitio'or doin-rtahnei dioin oleka do'oni-halli , ne rweran targa nainiayarni mak emkade la nhiurni-wnia'anni wawannu wali . Riy honona hota rpolu-rwak rer lia ' Uplerlawna . Honona re rhopliala hihi'ini-yapyapni yatyatni-halalli la ' a ir rimormior wialli la'pa do'oni-halli honona re .
Who knows whether God will not turn and relent , and turn away from his fierce anger , so that we might not perish ? ||| Twakwak de Uplerlawna pen neka Nhuria ralamni pa edonna Nwahla it do'oni-halli . Twakwak de Enherun doin hya ' mak E Neti olek wa totpena yana tler la yatyatni-halalli yatlorni-yatra'ani !
God saw their works , that they turned from their evil way . God relented of the disaster which he said he would do to them , and he did n't do it . ||| Uplerlawna Nlin reri-nmat reria hya ' maka ha rhi ' a re . E orgahani Namkeka de honona rolin doini oleka nhiolli-lietni mak khala re olekwa . Dewade E orgahani Nherun doinia hya ' maka E Neti oleka wa , me edonna Nukmua re .
But it displeased Jonah exceedingly , and he was angry . ||| Mere Yunus ralamni edonna nreiniana hya ' maka Uplerlawna ha Nhi ' a , ne yeher to'ama ralamni namehra .
He prayed to the LORD , and said , Please , LORD , was n't this what I said when I was still in my own country ? Therefore I hurried to flee to Tarshish , for I knew that you are a gracious God and merciful , slow to anger , and abundant in loving kindness , and you relent of doing harm . ||| Noma nsumbian pa nakot la ORGAHI-ORHA ' A niwra , Orgahi-Orha ' u ne ! La ' lerni la a ' g edon liergot ma'ta la ' a noh ' u , de agatg oleka wa de hota Omhi ' mak emkade . La ' hade pede pleta-plet pa a'uwlar pia liawa la ' Tarsis wa ! Agatga de O ' de Uplerlawna maka ksayni onni O ' a . Omhur niohora plalahwa rira do'oni-halla la O ' a , me Omherun doinia hya ' maka Omueti olek la wa pa edonna Mukmua owa'an ira , onnila Omtiutga ralam kalwiedmu la ' a riy honona .
Therefore now , LORD , take , I beg you , my life from me , for it is better for me to die than to live . ||| Pede Matroma , samuounu de Mhi ' a pua amuat niek wa totpena yana amuormiori pia a'umkek O hihi'imu de .
The LORD said , Is it right for you to be angry ? ||| Noma ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nakot la Niwra , O ' mukleha nhiapargen pia omuwenna emkade .
Then Jonah went out of the city and sat on the east side of the city , and there made himself a booth and sat under it in the shade , until he might see what would become of the city . ||| Nhor nioma Yunus nla'awa la leta Niniwe walli tipru na'nama nhi ' nana hoiwiali id pa namtatna la ' hande totpena nwei tieka hota hya ' a ed maka Uplerlawna Nala la ' a leta Niniwe .
The LORD God prepared a vine and made it to come up over Jonah , that it might be a shade over his head to deliver him from his discomfort . So Jonah was exceedingly glad because of the vine . ||| Dewade ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu Nala au id pa nmor die akni plo ' a-plahwa me npoti-nkadwu totpena Yunus ndella nayanni de nayahew samomuou pa yana pahna rehia . Ne Yunus ralamni nahepuepru onnila au die .
But God prepared a worm at dawn the next day , and it chewed on the vine so that it withered . ||| Mere la'pa repardoin yawyawar ma'ta noma Uplerlawna Nhi ' a orna id pa na'ana au die ga'arni pa leretniekla napliau .
When the sun arose , God prepared a sultry east wind , and the sun beat on Jonah 's head , so that he was faint and requested for himself that he might die . He said , It is better for me to die than to live . ||| La'pa lera nhit wa noma Uplerlawna Nala anin panpahna pa nten die nwatiawu tipru . Tre ' kuku ' pa Yunus niwra napru'wu la yawa yoma lera pahnani emeknekama ai kwiari la o'tani . Nakot la Uplerlawna de edonna nwaror nan oleka mormiori wa , samouounu de enmat niek wa .
God said to Jonah , Is it right for you to be angry about the vine ? He said , I am right to be angry , even to death . ||| Mere Uplerlawna Nakot la Niwra , Omukleha nhiapargen pia omuwenna onnila au die napliawua . Noma Yunus nakot la niwra , Nihya'pa a ' g edon uwenna , la ' a plolloli de awuenan meman pa agiwra muati .
The LORD said , You have been concerned for the vine , for which you have not labored , neither made it grow , which came up in a night and perished in a night . ||| Noma ORGAHI-ORHA ' A Nakot la Niwra , Yawulla-yatniamin de ha nmor ti'ola ' mela ida , me hota napliau lia ' mel mak kmai . Taken niana omhi ' a pa nmori me o ' edonna mtiera . La'pa emkade ho'mana o ralammu e ntuindoin la yoma au die napliau wa ? !
Should n't I be concerned for Nineveh , that great city , in which are more than one hundred twenty thousand persons who ca n't discern between their right hand and their left hand , and also many animals ? ||| Mere Ompuarora de hota A ' g edonna wuaror nana Niniwe letlawan dena ? ! Mai Niniwe di , de rimormiori e narehi lawan wal lia riwnu rahu ida terampworu mak kaplinu-kaplo ' nohora hameni ed mak kalwieda me hameni mak kyata , ne nhiuri-wnia'ana liawanni er wal lia ! Meman nek la A ralam ntiundoin la ' hade , de lol talanni .
A long time ago , in the time of our ancestors , a man and a woman were married . The man 's name was Rettiau and the woman 's name was Rarlay . ||| Ululu plialiaini upa lerni-tgara lerni de patke ' a ida nora muanke ' a ida rmehlima ; muanke ' a nwawa Rettiau , patke ' a nwawa Rarlay .
They were of the nobility clan called Wetgai Ili . ||| Hare de maran Wetgai Ilia re .
In time they had two sons , the elder was named Rettiau Lay and the younger named Rettiau Ruru . They were called this after their father because his name was Rettiau . However , the elder was really named Lay and the younger was named Ruru . ||| Noka rrora a'nani muanke ' a woru ; yanulu nwawa Rettiau Lay ma gari nwawa Rettiau Ru'ru , yoma rrora amni Rettiau pede riwra Rettiau Ru'ru Rettiau Lay , mere plollolli de yanulu nwawa Lay me gari nwawa Ru'ru .
The years went by and they grew up under their parents care . One day when they were older they made a fish trap with their father . ||| Noma rtera-rlahga pa rla'awa tuwgeni-lawangen wia pa nhi'noka ror amni rwed yatru ida .
Then one day their mother Rarlay became sick . ||| Lla'pa lera ida na Rarlay e namehra .
She was so sick she did not want to eat . ||| Namehra pa nahmena na'ana-nemnu .
So she said to her husband , `` I need to eat some shark 's liver and then I 'll feel better . Go tell our children to set the fish trap . '' ||| Nakotla hawni niwra : `` Au'una iwu ati nampa kalwieda pa mhuopantek it a'nani rrora rla rtollia yatru . ''
So the two children went and set the trap and caught a shark . ||| Noka a'nani rrora rla rtol yatru , pa rla de de yatru enni iwu ida .
They went to get it and bring it home , ||| Noka rrora rwahi'pa rodia iwu pa rmaiwia ,
but they had forgotten to bring a machete . ||| Mere rror edon rod wehla .
The eldest stayed at the trap and guarded the fish while the youngest went to fetch the machete . ||| Noka yanulu natiakrer iwu na gari nma nal wehla .
After he left , the shark opened its mouth and said to the elder brother , `` Have pity on me and help me and let me go . '' ||| Gari nma nala wehla de iwu nhari lirni pa nakotla yanulu : `` Ei mtulan pa msiaini a ' u de muolindoinia a ' u la . ''
I will go to my home . ||| Ailia'awa a noh ' u-a rai'yu .
If some day when you are sailing you run into trouble then call on me to come help you and I will . ' ||| Pena lera ida mela id pa , ler lola mel lol pa mhuopla-mliar pa mlier la komlorni-pah ' a metni demade de mpuolu-mpuak a ' u pena ahgima rie o ' a , aitulan ti o ' a , hgimpai-muanatg o ' a . ''
So the elder brother let the shark go . ||| Noka yanulu na nolindoini iwu la .
A little while later the younger brother arrived with the machete , but the shark was already gone . ||| Garni nod wehla pa nmai de de iwu nmolu olekwa .
So the younger brother asked , “ Older brother , where is the shark ? '' ||| Noka garni natiana niwra : “ Kaka iwu etla meni ? ”
`` I let the shark go , '' he answered . ||| Nakot niwra : “ Iwu agolindoini oleka la . ''
Then they went home . ||| Noka rrora rla'awa .
Then they went home . When they got home their parents asked them , “ Where is the fish you caught ? '' ||| Rla'awa noka inni-amni ratiana riwra : “ Enmi erla meni ? ''
`` We did not catch anything . '' ||| `` Amakleh eni , yatru nakleh eni . ”
Then the mother was angry and said , “ You kids are lying . '' ||| Dewade inni nawenanwa niwra : “ Kekeʼenkua ra rwaklili-rwakdiori , rputra-rpalka . ''
I know you caught a shark and then came home to get a machete to cut it up . ||| Agatga de yatru na ’ eni iwu na ’ nama mmiai miala wehla pa mial la mpiarowta-mpi ’ anna .
You let the shark go and then you lied to me . Now you must be killed . ” ||| Ne miy miolindoinia iwu olek la pa mimpiutra-mpialka a ' u pa o dodo ’ on di de musti rwenan miy . ”
Then she told her husband to kill the two children . ||| Noka nakotla hawni pa rwenna kekeʼenku ’ a rrora .
Do not let them live because they have lied and deceived us . '' ||| “ Yana ramori-radaria yoma rwaklili-rwakdiori , rputra-rpalk olek it wa . ''
The father felt sorry for his two children , ||| Noka amni nsainia a'nani rrora .
but he obeyed his wife . ||| Mere llernohora hawni .
However , he felt pity on them , so he packed them some food for the trip . ||| Mere amni nsainia rpa nhi ' a gerni wareherni , nhi ' gotgot la rrora .
Then he said to them , “ In a little while you two run away . '' ||| Nawew la rrora pa : “ Kekwali die mro ' miwlarwia . ”
When it became dark he filed his machete to make it real sharp . Then he got two banana trunks and two coconut shells and put them in the boys ' beds . ||| Lera nmellaw noka amni npona wehlani pa naploklokar na ’ nama lla nhi ’ a ud liola woru ma nkeni gera la rpu'pu woru pa nkenia la dudgenni wawannu pa nhiʼtarga .
In the middle of the night he woke the two boys up so they could escape . He gave them each some food and told them to run off . Then the father took his machete and began to hack at one of the banana trunks and pour out the liquid from the coconut shell . ||| A'nani rrora ranina pa mela letgara dewade de namatdoinia a ’ nani rrora pa rrora rawlarwia , nhakar gotgota pa rima-rima naʼala gotgotni pa rawlarwia na ’ nama , na'ala wehla pa rrahyetia ud liola id wa demade de nhurdoinia ger rpuʼpu id la .
While he was doing this his wife heard the noise and said , “ That 's what you get children -- death - when you do not obey and respect your parents . '' ||| Demade hawni niwra : “ Hniakarmi hade , mmiati-mmiati , keke'en maka edon kaʼunna-kamtaʼata inni nor amni . ''
Then the father took up the machete again to hack the other banana trunk and pour out the milk from the second coconut shell . ||| Demade de muankeʼeni na ' owan la wehla pa ndawreti owaʼan udi lola id wa demade de nhurdioini gera lari id la wa .
Then the wife again , `` That 's what you get , death . '' ||| Demade de hawni niwra : “ Hniakarmi hade , miati-miati . ''
When he finished the father got some water to wash off the bed so people would think that he was washing away the blood . ||| Noka keke'enku ' a rrora rlergot pa rawlarwia ne muanke ' a ntot pa na'ala gera pa nkuhi-nho'ordoinia lewu wawannu totpa riwra e nkuhi-nho'ora rara .
In the meantime , the two boys ran and ran carrying their food . They kept going through the night until the heat of the next day when they got very hungry . ||| Keke'enku ' a rawlarwia , rrora rla'awa , rodi gerni-wareherni pa rrora rala'awa , rala'awa , rala'la mel di pa nodi pa repar pa lera npahna pa rrora raplarwa .
The elder opened his food up to eat , but it was ashes . ||| Raplarwa noka yanulu nhi ' a gotgotni pa rrora ra'ana de gotgotawu .
Then the younger said , `` Brother , let us try mine . '' ||| Noka gari niwra : `` Kaka demade tsi'teka a gotgo'tu . ''
When they opened it , it was corn . Then they ate it . ||| Rhi ' gotgotni de gari gotgotni de wetra ' a , noka rrora ra'ana .
When they were done eating they continued on . ||| Ra'an pa nhoru noka rrora rala'awa .
They continued on and on until they came upon a bird called the 'Bird of the West ' ( which gives power ) . ||| Rala'aw-rala'aw-rala'aw-rala ' a nek pa nhi'iwa de rlernana ma'nu ida riwra ma'nu warta .
Once they saw it , the elder brother tried to hit it with a rock . He tried and tried , but he could not hit it . ||| Noka yanulu nwa'ala , nwa'ala-nwa'alneka mere ta'eni nwa'alnana nwa'ala sala-sala .
Even though the bird did not even fly away . ||| Ma'nu mana edona nnem wali .
Then the younger brother said , `` Let me have a try . '' ||| Noka gari niwra : `` Kaka demada wua'alteka ! ''
So he picked up a rock and threw it at the bird . He hit it straight away and the bird fell . Then he ran over and he plucked out the eye ball ( where the power was ) and swallowed it . ||| Gari nteman watu dewade de nwa'alnana pa ma'nu ntuinierun noka na'ala pa nkopildoini matni olli pa llumga .
Then they continued on and on until they came to a branch in the road . ||| Rala ' owa'an rala ' owa'an rala ' owa'an rala owa'ana lla ' pa rler la talla hniakarni .
One branch went to the left and the other to the right . ||| Talla ida nnehna malwiru , ida nnehna malgana .
The eldest decided that he would take the road that branched to the left . After going down the left road he soon came upon a man who was a goldsmith . ||| Noka yanulu lola talan malwiru , llala ' noka lernana maka khur miaha-ktor leli .
So the eldest asked the goldsmith for work . The man agreed and gave the elder brother a job , helping him make things out of gold . The younger brother decided to take the road that went to the right and he continued on until he came to a banyan tree ( a place of authority and knowledge ) , ||| Noka yanulu lla ' pa nahaka kniari la noka rreinana ra'nana pa rre'ela nhuri maha-ntor leli , na gari nanpena llola malgana nalola-nala ' nek pa lla'awa nu'nu ida hananni .
Under the tree was a well . ||| Lla'awa nu'nu hananni , ne gera ida etla nu'nu nainni .
It was not long before an old woman from the nobility clan of Mnietu came to draw water . The younger ( brother ) took a banyan fruit and threw it into her dipper . ||| Noka happe ' a Mnietu nmai pa ntip gera , ntip ger noka keke'en di na'ala nu'nu wo ' a pa nwa'ala la kewtu ralamni .
The old woman said , `` The birds are making this water dirty . '' ||| Noka happe ' a niwra : `` Ei onu-ma'nu ri rhi ' a kdedeh neka ger di wa . ''
Then she poured the water out . ||| Noka na'ala pa ntowurdoinia la .
Then she drew water again , and then again the youth took a banyan fruit and threw it into her dipper again . ||| Noka ntipu owa'ana , ntipu owa'an dewade keke'en di na'ala nu'nu wo ' a pa naklu owa'ana la kewtu ralamni .
Then the old woman said : `` This bird keep making this water dirty . '' '' ||| Noka happe ' a niwra : `` Onu-ma'nu ri a rhi ' a kdedeh neka ger di wa .
Then she poured out the water again ||| Noka ntowurdoini owa'ana la . ''
This happened three times and then the old woman looked up into the tree . ||| Emkade pa re'eni wotelu dewade happe ' a namkek la heyanna .
She saw the boy and said , `` Grandchild , where did you come from ? Come down and stay with me for I do not have any children . '' ||| Namkeknana keke'en di noka niwra : `` Up ei , omdiella meni , muernu ukleha upa-a'ana pa tot la lla'pa tsoliwutu , atiera-liah ' u . ''
So he came down from the tree and went with her . ||| Noka keke'en di nerun pa nora rla'awa .
As they walked they talked and talked . He told her about his parents , ||| La la'noka nwahaurnohora emkade-emkadi la inni-amni .
and she said he ought to come live with her since she had no children . ||| Noka upni niwra : `` Itro ' a tsoliwut lia hadi wa pa ukleh up-a'na wal pia tro ' a tsoliwutu . ''
So they stayed together and the younger brother grew up . However , he contracted a disease . ||| Noka rora rden nek la hande wa pa nhi ' pa llawan wa , mere namno ' a-namrara .
Then one day he heard that his brother was with a goldsmith and was learning to make gold jewelry . ||| Noka ler ida na ratlin de kakni di e lernana makhuri miaha-ktor leli , rre'ela nhuri miaha-ntor leli .
So he said to the old woman , `` Grandma , I want to go see this goldsmith . '' ||| Noka garni nakotla upni : `` Upa a ' u la umkekteka makhuri miaha-ktor leli ri na . ''
The grandmother said : `` Go have a look . '' ||| Noka upni niwra : `` Yowa de mlia'teka ! ''
Then he went and wove some palm leaves together and made it into the shape of the bird which he had hit with the stone . He wanted to give it to his elder brother as a sign so that he would look at it and say , `` Who is it that gives me these palm leaves woven like the 'Bird of the West ' ? '' He wanted his brother to recognize that it was him . ||| Noka lla'awa dewade garni nayapi a'altawi la ma'nu maka ira rwa'alnana totpena nala la kakni , pa kakni namkeka totpena kakni natiana niwra : `` He ' makala a'altawi ma'nu warat dina ? '' totpena natga garni .
However , when the elder brother saw the image of the bird he just looked at it and took it and made it into gold , but did not even ask about his younger brother . ||| Mere kakni namkeka a'altawi ma'nu warta , noka na'ala pa nhi ' a la maha na edon natian wali garni wali .
Then the younger brother came home and said to the old woman , `` I tried to make it so my older brother would recognize me but he is already rich and does not ( want to ) recognize me any more . ||| Noka garni nmaiwa pa nakotla upni niwra : `` Upa ahgi ' a ka'ku totpa natg a ' u mere rre ' a-ntarwa pa naplinu a'au wa .
He just took the leaves I wove like the bird and made it into gold . '' ||| Na ' to ' o la a'altawi mak a'uyapia la ma'nu wa rla pa nkenia la mahani . ''
The old woman said : `` He has already become so wealthy that he has forgotten you . '' ||| Noka upni niwra : `` Takot pa nre ' a-ntarg olekwa pa naplinu o ' o wa . ''
So the younger brother continued to stay with the old woman until one day news came from Melai-Watkali that the king of Melai-Watkali had made a riddle . Whoever was able to solve the riddle could marry one of his six daughters . ||| Rrora rholiwutu-rletwutu nek la hande pa lera ida na ne kota-de'eta nwattiawua Melai-Watkali , nmai de de riwra rai Melai Watkali nhi ' a weta-weta , pa ha meni lla'pa nwetnana demade nora a'nani patke ' a ida rmehlima , yoma a'nani patke ' a wonem era re .
The elder brother , Rettiau Lay planned to sail there and try to solve the riddle so that he could marry one of the king 's daughters . ||| Noka kakni Rettiau Lay di nwetrul lie ' u-ndadli lliara pa totpena nla lla ' pa nareri-nawaka maran Melai a'nani id pa nora rmehlima , hornama nwetnana kokkoi hade me weta-weta .
There were other people on the boat also . ||| Pa puou mniotni riy ida woru ror wali .
The younger brother found out about this and said to the old woman , `` Grandma , I would like to go along to Melai-Watkali . '' ||| Noma garni Rettiau Ru'ru di natlinnana noka nakotla upni : `` Upa a ' u la wuatena au pa agora mla ' Melai . ''
But the old woman said : `` Grandchild , do not go off with those rich people to get married , '' ||| Mere upni nakotiwra : `` Up ei , yana mlia ' a ma makre ' a-maktarga hare pa rla rwahaka mehlimni-marya'ani na omlia ' wali . ''
But he really wanted to go . He said : `` I do not want to go get married . I just want to go have a look , '' ||| Mere upni nahmen memna nakot niwra : `` Upa a ' u la ' a , a ' u edona lia uhaka mehli'mu-marya ' u mere a ' u lia umkek to ' a . ''
Then the old woman said : `` Then go with them . '' ||| Noka upni niwra : `` Dema mlia mpuate'nu pa mlia'awa . ''
Then he went asked for a ride saying : `` I 'm not trying to get married , I just want to go have a look at that land . '' ||| Noka lla nwatena pa rreinana niwra : `` A ' u lia edon uhaka a mehli'mu ma a ' u lia umkek to ' a noha-rai . ''
Then they allowed him to sail with them but he just stayed in the hull of the boat because of his disease . ||| Noka rreinana-rra'nana pa la la ' pa nora rhopal mere ndella hota rria'geni nattiaka rria ' a rrietni yoma namno ' a-namrara .
Then they left . ||| Noka rla'awa .
When they got to Melai-Watkali , the elder brother got off and went ashore . ||| Rla'awa Melai wa pa kakni rerun la keranni wa .
After they served him food , the king said , `` Yes , you can marry one of my daughters if you guess the riddle . '' ||| Rerun la keranni pa rhoi-rtania pa nhoruwa noka rakotiwra : `` Yowa , makota de de u'upu-a'anu pa miora mmiehlima hornama mikwietnana weta-wet hadi ma kokkoia di . ''
Then the king took six pieces of bamboo and made them smooth so no one knew which piece was from the middle or which piece was from the end of the bamboo . ||| Noka maran Melai nhi ' a petu wu'unu wonema pa nhi ' a pa namdiddidni pa riy raplinga onni meni , ltutnu meni .
Then the king told him to guess . ||| Pa nhopan pa rakwieta .
The elder brother tried to guess , but did not know ( the answer ) . ||| Rakwieta mere raplinga .
Then the king of Melai-Watkali brought out six pigs , saying , `` Guess which one is the oldest , middle and youngest . '' ||| Noka maran Melai nhopan pa rala wawi a'nani wonema pa nmai na'nama nhopan pa niwra : `` Mikwietteka wawi a'nani yanulu ed ha meni ma , letgara ha meni ma , gari ha meni . ''
So the elder brother tried to guess again , but he did not know so he guessed wrong . ||| Noma rakwieta mere edona rakwietnana , raplinga .
Then the king said , `` Is there no one else ( from the boat to guess the riddle ) ? '' ||| Noka rai nakota niwra : `` Riy rhoruwa ? ''
`` That is all , there is no one else in the boat , '' ( the elder brother replied ) ||| `` Ei riy hadamonna , riy hadamonan la puou . ''
The king said , `` There must be someone ; call him to come , '' ||| Ne rai niwra : `` Yan riy erla de mpiolga pa nmai . ''
He answered , `` There is one person , but he is diseased , '' ||| Nakot niwra : `` Ei riy id etla mere namno ' a-namrara . ''
The king said , `` It does not matter if he is diseased , he is still a person . Go call him , he might be able to solve the riddle . '' ||| Noka rai niwra : `` Namno ' a-namrar mana riy mormioria pa mlia mpiolga pa yana nakwietnana kokkoi rina . ''
Then they told them to go call him . ||| Noka rhopan pa rla rpolga .
The man who went to call him said , `` Come on down ! '' ||| Muanke ' a ida lla npolga nakot niwra : `` Ei muerun la ! ''
When the younger brother came off the boat ( the man ) said , `` I 'm going on ahead , you follow quickly . '' ||| Noka nerun la wa , noma niwra : `` A ' u la ulg o ' a ma plet pa mtiy . ''
Then the younger brother changed his dirty clothes and got off the boat to go ( follow the man ) . ||| Noka nayalindoinia pol yatni-rain yatni pa nerun la keranni pa lla'awa .
While he was still at the gate , before he even had a chance to go into the village , he met an old woman . ||| Lla lla'pa nden ma'ta la ppuohra gaini , edona lla ' ma'ata leta ralamni de nwatromnana patke ' ida ( happe ' ida ) .
This woman 's name was Puilioi-Romloi . ||| Happe ' di nwawa Puilioi-Romloi .
She said to him , `` Grandchild , where are you going ? '' ||| Noka happe ' di nakotla niwra : `` Upa omlia meni ? ''
`` Grandma , the king came and called me to come . He wants to say something to me , I had better go see . '' ||| `` Up ei , rai npolg a ' u pa ailia lla ' pa rakot hya-hya ' a , a ' u ge lia'teka . ''
Then the old woman said to him , `` When you go to guess the six pieces of bamboo and the six piglets . ||| Noka happe ' di nakotla niwra : `` Upa omlia de omukwieta kokkoi petu rahlanu wonema ma wawi a'nani wonema .
When you are guessing make sure you look and see where the blue fly lands . The piece of bamboo it lands on will be the end . Then it will land on the middle and then on the other end . ||| Omlia mukwieta , omlia la ' de mumkek nek pa llaran mota ntai la petu honi id de de petu onni hade pa emkade mammain nek pa lla genia petu honi .
The same with the pigs . ||| Wawi a'na mana emkade wali .
It will land on the eldest first , then the middle one and then on the youngest . Make sure you look where the blue fly lands and then guess it . '' ||| Mumkek nek pa llaran mota ntai la wawi meni de wawi a'nani yanulu hade , ntai owa'an la han meni de mak lernohora yanulu , letgara , mak lernohora letgara , gari , mumkek nek pa llaran mota ntai la ha meni de mukwiet hade , mliernohora . ''
( He answered ) , `` Okay '' ||| `` Yowa . ''
Then he went . ||| Noka lla'wa .
When he got there he was asked to be seated and then the king said , `` Everyone has tried to guess the riddle , but they have not been able do it . You are the only one left . Have a try so you can marry one of my daughters . '' ||| Lla'awa pa la ' noka rhopan namtatna nhornioka rai nakot niwra : `` Hare honnona rakwieta kokkoi mere ta'eni rwetnana pede tre ' ma'ta omuemmeh ' a pa dodo'on di pa ompwetnana de omuora a'nu ida mmiehlima . ''
Then they brought out the six pieces of bamboo . The younger brother looked to see where the blue fly landed and then said , `` This is the end piece , this is the middle and this is the other end . '' ||| Noka rla rala petu wu ' u matnemnemni pa nmai noka namkek nek pa llaran mota ntai la ha meni dewade nakotiwra : `` Petu onni hadi , rahlanu letgarni hadi na tutnu hadi . ''
Then they called again for the six piglets to come so he could guess . Then he looked where the blue fly landed . Then he said , `` This is the eldest . '' ||| Noka rpolu owa'ana wawi a'na rwonema rmai pa nakwieta de namkek nek pa llaran mota ntai la wawi a'nani noka niwra : `` Wawi a'nani yanulu eda di . ''
Then the blue fly landed on another . ( So he said , ) `` This one is the second eldest . '' ||| Llaran mota ntai owa'an la ida : `` A , mak lernohora yanulu ed hadi . ''
Then the blue fly landed on another . ( So he said ) `` This is the middle one . '' ||| Llaran mota ntai owan la ida : `` A , letgara hadi . ''
In that manner he continued and solved the whole riddle by guessing which one was younger until he got to the very youngest . ||| Emkade pa lla'awa gari pa gari hoho ' a dewade nwetnana oleka kokkoi wa .
Then the king said , `` You have solved the riddle . I have six daughters . Come and choose ! '' ||| Noka rai niwra : `` Mpwetnan oleka kokkoi pa a'nu wonem hare pa rmai pa mpualiria !
Which one do you like ? ||| A o sukmu la ha meni .
But first you must guess which one is the oldest , the middle and the youngest . '' ||| Mere mukwiet ulga , a ' a'nu wonema re yanulu ha meni , letgara ha meni , gari ha meni , pa ompwetnana nanpena muor ida mmiehlima . ''
Then the king lined up his daughters , but not according to age . He mixed them up . ||| Noka ne'era a'nani re , mere edona re'era naplollola , gari ndella handi na , yanulu ndella handi na , letgara ndella handi .
Then the younger brother attempted this final riddle . He looked at where the blue fly landed on one of the girl 's hair and said , `` This is the oldest . '' ||| Noka nakwieta , namkek nek pa llaran mota ntai la riy id dohoni dewade de niwra : `` A yanulu eda hadi . ''
Then the blue fly landed on another one 's hair . Then he said , `` This is the next to the oldest , '' ||| Pa llaran mota nnem pa ntai owa'an la id dohoni de niwra : `` Maklernohora yanulu hadi . ''
The blue fly landed on another one 's hair so he said , `` This is the middle ( child ) . '' ||| Pa llaran mota nnem pa ntai owa'an la id dohoni dewade niwra : `` A letgara hadi la . ''
He continued on like this until he solved the whole riddle . Then the king said , `` You have solved the riddle . You may choose which ever daughter you would like . '' ||| Emkade mammain pa nakwietnan mommuoga dewade rai niwra : `` O mukwietnana oleka kokkoi ri wa pa o ralammu niwra muora a ' a'nu meni de . ''
He said , `` The youngest , '' ||| Noka nakotiwra : `` Gari . ''
Then the two of them got married . ||| Noka nor gari rmehlim pa .
Then the two of them got married then they prepared to return to Luang . ||| Nor gari rmehlim pa rwahi ' a-rwayodi pa rwaho ' o-rwatierun pa rawallia Lgon wa .
But the king 's daughter would not drink water , only the milk from young coconuts . ||| Mere rai a'na di edon nemun gera na nemun mammaini norkohola .
So they loaded the boat with young coconuts , ||| Noka rken norkohol la puou .
And they made a tent so the king 's daughter would stay on the boat 's deck . ||| Me rhi ' a tniernu totpena rai a'nani patke ' a ndella puou wawannu .
But the elder brother Rettiau Lay ( felt angry and hurt ) , so he schemed of a way to deceive his younger brother and to take his new wife . ||| Ne kakni Rettiau Lay di nwaror oleka klili-kdiori ohpa-lahara totpena na'ala patke'eni yoma ralamni namehra la garni .
Then they got on board the boat to sail . ||| Noka rha'atla puou pa rhopalwa .
When they ( were about ) to sail , the elder brother and the captain said to those on the boat , `` When we go , hide all of your machetes and knives , leave only the ax out . ||| Rhopal noka ankoda hadi ma kakni di nawew la puou mniotni : `` La ' de de miy de mommuou wehla ta'wa re honnona , mkien nieka prahni la tio'ora .
But make the handle a bit loose so that when he takes it to open the coconut ( for his wife ) the blade will come off . '' ||| Mere prahni de mhi ' a pa nkalkiali , totpena italla tsapil nora de de omriana de natliehudoin la . ''
Then the crew hid all the knives and machetes and left only the ax out . ||| Noka puou mniotni rade ' mommuou wehla ta'wa re honnona , prahni nmemmeh ' a ndella tio'ora .
Then they set sail . ||| Noka rhopalwa .
When they had left the shore behind and were over the deep blue water , the girl got thirsty and ordered them to get a coconut ready for her to drink . She told her husband to get a knife or machete to cut open the coconut , but the crew said there were none . There was only an ax available to cut open the coconut . ||| Rhopal pa rmaiwa hletan letgar wa dewade de patke ' a ttiernu keran pa nhopna rhi ' nor pa nemnu , nhopan muanke'eni di natian wehla ta'wa pa ralla rhapil nora , riwra : `` A wehla hadamonna , ta'wa hadamonna , e prahni id etla pa mualla mhuapil nora . ''
Then his brother , the boat driver , said , `` Hey , do not get this boat dirty . Cut it open on the edge of the boat . '' ||| Noka na'ala prahni di pa niwra nhapil la puou ralamni , kakni ankoda niwra : `` Ei yana mhi ' a kdeha puou di , mhuaplia la puou aratni . ''
Then the younger brother took the ax to cut open the coconut on the boat 's edge , but the blade fell off and sunk deep down into the sea . ||| Noka nhap lia la puou aratni pa nhap lia pa rran la prahni emkadewa de prahni natliehudoin la pa ntunierun la hletna wikni .
Then the elder brother said , `` You go get my ax head . I do not want money or gold things in exchange for it so go to the bottom of the sea and get my ax head . '' ||| Dewade kakni nakotla : `` Mlia mual memna a prahni ' u , ma a ' a ge donna uhaka kupna-kai leli-mah dom la prahni hnierannu , mlia mual memna a prahni ' u la hletna wikni . ''
Then the younger brother was quiet until night time . Then he said to his wife , `` In a little while I will go get the ax head . '' Then he took the girl 's ring off and put it on his finger . ||| Dewade garni nherieriwia pa nmela pa nakotla hawni : `` Kekwali de ailia gala prahni mere na'ala patke ' a kdielli pa nakdielia . Then he took the girl 's ring off and put it on his finger . ''
If God wills to protect me I will return , but I can not control whether I will return or am lost in the sea . '' ||| Lla'pa Orgahi-Ora ' a nayoryori a ' u de a ' u wali , mere ailia pa muati-muoli hgo ' a tiawu de de takot pa . ''
You go on with the rest of those on the boat . Wait for me to return , in case I live to return . However if I die and am lost at sea that is beyond my control . ||| Ne muor neka puou mniotni mlia'awa lla ' pa amuormiori de mpieiwei-mniarnar a ' u pa nodia pa a ' u wali mere edonan de takot pa !
Then he went to the back of the boat and early in the morning when the first red rays appeared in the east he called to God , in Malay they call this 'praying to the Lord ' . ||| Emkadewa pa lla'awa puou li'irnu pa repreparreria pa nmer la tipur dewade npollia Uplerlawna Mempulwatnu , lir Melai niwra nsumbain la Itmatromlawanni .
He picked up a rock which was in the boat , and he offered it up to heaven then called on God . `` Oh God , the Almighty , now I am asking you , turn your head and eyes to listen to my words and my request . ||| Na'ul lia watu maka rara werta puou id na'nama ntania la heyanan na'nima npollia Uplerlawna : `` Ei Matromlawnu na , Uplerlawna Mempulwatnu , dodo'on di de aupuolu-wuak ti o ' a , mhueri tlinmu-mutatar matmu , mutlina-mutailia ali'ru-atu'nu , polpuo'lu-wakwa'ku .
Now I am going into the deepest sea . ||| Dodo'on di de ailia'awa wuwulla hletna tpopioini-yoiri kdieldelma .
Consider/compare this rock as/to my body . ||| A'uwilu-uwala wat di la a ' ino'nu .
If you will protect me and allow me to return , let this rock I throw into the water float . ||| La lla'pa muyori-mudari a ' u pa a'uti'ila-uwal die , de wat di a'utretnia la tah ' i de npali .
But if I will die in the sea then cause this rock to sink . ||| Mere ailia lla'pa muati-muolu ahgo ' a-tiawu de muala pa wat di nteprernu .
Then he dropped the rock into the water , and the rock floated . ||| Dewade de natrerun watu la tah ' i de watu npali .
Then he took it again and earnestly prayed , `` Oh God , I am asking you again , if it is true that I will die in the sea then let this rock sink like the steel of a machete or a black rock . ||| Noka na'ala pa lokr owa'ana : `` Ei Matromlawnu na aupuolu owa'ana awuak owa'ana ti o ' a , plola lla'pa amuati-muolu hgo ' a-tiaw la hletan di wikni-yoir di ralamni de wat di mana natniepar wehl ihi nadguaur watu metma .
But if I will live , and you will protect me and allow me to return to my land then let this rock float . '' ||| Mere lla ' pa muormiori-diardiari mhimpai-mmuahatg a ' u pa a'uti'ili-uwallia a noh ' u-a rai'yu de wat di npali .
Then he let the rock drop again , and again it floated . ||| Noka natrernu owa'ana watu de , watu npali owa'ana .
Then he took the rock again for a third time and did like that again ( that is , prayed the same earnest prayer ) . ||| Dewade na ' owan la watu pa llokarnana re'eni wotelu emak had owa'ana .
He let the rock drop ( again ) , and it floated . ||| Dewade natrernu de watu npali .
After the rock floated ( again ) he dove into the water . ||| Watu npaliwa dewade e ' mana lelmerun wali wa .
He descended into the sea and he came to a banyan tree . ||| Nwuwlierun la tah ' i de de ed olek la nu'nu id tutnu .
He went below the tree and saw an old woman busily weaving under the banyan tree . ||| Dewade nlol nu'nu la yaw pa lla la ' de de happe ' a ida natentieninreri la nu'nu nainni .
He went and greeted the old woman . The woman said , `` Where are you coming from ? What are you doing ? '' ||| Lla'awa noka nwaka kalwieda la happe ' a noka happe ' a niwra : `` Up ei , omdiella meni ? O ma mhi ' a hya ' a ? ''
( He answered ) , `` I 'm just traveling around , grandmother . '' ||| `` Ulala upa . ''
Then the two of them talked and talked , and finally he asked the old woman , `` Did you hear anything fall down here ? '' ||| Noka rror rwahaur-wahaur noka nakotla upni di : `` Upa , edon mutlin hadoma ntuini la handi na , rokat la handi na ? ''
Then she said , `` I did not see anything , but I heard a noise by the chicken 's nest . Go have a look . Maybe what you are seeking is there because the chicken has already come down . '' ||| Noka niwra : `` Upa a ' ge don umkek hadoma , a ' u tlin to ' a hadoma rokat la kurna hiwi yaterun genni mlia mukekteka , yana etla ma hiwi nernu olekwa . ''
Then he went and saw the ax head in the nest . Then he took it and said , `` Grandmother , here it is . '' ||| Noka lla la ' de namkeknana prahni la kurna , noka na'ala pa niwra : `` Upa ed olek di wa .
I have found the ax head . '' ||| Prahni pa ailiernana oleka . ''
Then he picked up the ax head and put it in his loin cloth . ||| Noka na'ala pa nkenia la warni wuwannu la ' a hniekru ralamni .
Then he continued to talk with the old woman . After a while he said , `` I have to go now . '' ||| Nora upni rwahauru-rwahauru noka nakotiwra : `` Upa augiwra lia'awa . ''
The grandmother said , `` You can go , but wait for me to call all the fish so I can ask which one will take you back . '' ||| Noma upni niwra : `` Omlia'awa mere mpei pa apuoltieka i'ina-ya'ana rpa autianteka ha meni maka kwayop pa kottyarg o ' o la de . ''
She called many different kinds of fish and they said , `` We do not go to the surface of the water . '' ||| Npolu i'ina-ya'ana , i'ina-ya'ana dom demade riwra : `` Ami edonna mla heyanna , mla mloi mla mpali . ''
She called the sea cow , and the sea cow said , `` I do not swim on the surface . '' ||| Noka npolga ruini , ruini niwra : `` Au ge dona lia puali ma'ata . ''
Then she called the shark , and the shark said , `` I do not travel along the surface of the water , but I heard the sailfish say that he swims on top , call him and ask him . '' ||| Npolu iwu , iwu niwra : `` Aug edona lia lioi lia puali ma'ta la heyanna , ma a'utlina hruilarna niwra lla heyanna pa mpuolga pa mutianteka . ''
Then she called the sailfish . When he came she asked , `` Do you like to go along the surface ? '' ||| Noka npolga hruilarna pa nmai noka natiana : `` O miwra mlia heyanna ? ''
The sailfish said , `` Yes , I go along the surface of the water . '' ||| Noka hruilarna niwra : `` Yowa , augiwra lia lioi-puallia la heyanna . ''
( She said to the sailfish ) , `` You go along the surface with this man . '' ||| `` Mlia mlioi-mpuallia heyanan demade muora muanke ' dilla .
You take care of him and bring him safely to his home . ||| La lla'pa mhimpai-muanatga pa mlia lla ' pa muottiarga la nohoni-raini .
You go and obey whatever he says , bring him home safe and sound . '' ||| Omlia la ' de nakota hya ' a de omliernohora , omliernohora lirni maka ha nakot o'oa ma mhimpai-muanatga eda di totpena nmormiori-ndardiar pa lla'awa nohoni-raini . ''
Then the younger brother said good-bye to the old woman and got on the back of the sailfish and the sailfish carried him away . ||| Noka nawliohortarga happe ' a pa nha'atla hruilarna du'urnu wawannu pa hruilarna nodia pa nma npalwia .
This old woman 's name was Rarhurmetma-Rarlelkialwa . ||| Ne happe ' di nwawa Rahrurmetma-Rarlelkialwa .
The sailfish and Rettiau Ruru sailed on top of the water between Timor and Kisar Islands . ||| Noka Hruilarna nora Rettiau Ru'ru rpallia tah ' i ulti de rma rpallia Railawan nora Yotwawa rletni .
When they were between the two islands the sailfish faced south to try and see if he had enough power and strength to tear apart the east end of the island of Timor named Nohmeni . ||| Pa rpallia noha rletni dewade hruilarna napallia Tranan pa ntena rurni-laini la ' a Railawna walli Tipru pa nteretia tutnu pa npandoin la pa tutnu de nwawa Nohmehi .
The sailfish used his strength to do that . ||| De hruilarna nten rurni la eda de .
He turned around and faced/headed toward Kisar Island , and so Kisar shook . Because of this Kisar 's mountains are at the edge of the island and the villages are in the middle . ||| Noka nwali doini pa nnehna Yotwaw pa de Yotwawa ndiwdiwra pede Yotwawa wo'orni ndella walliwalli na leta etla noha letgarni .
Then the sailfish headed north to go to Roma Island to destroy the west side of Roma . The result of this is the island of Nohyata . Then he turned around and came to Nohaumetam to finish it off . Finally he came to Maupor to violently attack Roma . ||| Noka nnehna Ra ' i wia pa lla'awa Romna-Wiatan della pa nweyat la Romna walli warta pa Nohyata Roman dewade nwalidoinia la pa nmaiwa Nohaumetam pa nhi'doinia Nohaumetam pa nweyat la Roman pa nmaiwa Maupor wa pa ntereti Roman .
Then Rettiau Ruru said , `` That is enough . '' ||| Dewade Rettiau Ru'ru nakotla : `` Hadewa . ''
Do not destroy this one . '' ||| Hadi edonna .
`` Let us just go south . '' ||| `` Itnehnateka Tranna . ''
Then they went south and came to the island of Leti . ||| Noka rnehna Tranan de rmaiwa Leti wa .
When they got to Leti Rettiau Ruru said , `` No , not this one . '' ||| Rmaiwa Leti wa dewade de Rettiau Ru'ru niwra : `` Aitia ' a eda di . ''
The ( people of ) Leti were afraid and said , `` Do not destroy us , wait , when Luang people come here we will serve them fish and cider . '' ||| Noka Leti ramta'at pa Leti riwra : `` Yana mpueyat noh di na nanpena mpei-mnara Lgona upni Lgona a'nani pa rmai nanpena amdudni i'ina ma mpoknihi tgo ' a la . ''
So this island was named Tun i'ina Kalorni because they cut up fish and poured palm cider which they call kalura . ||| Pede noha di nwawa Tun i'ina Kalorni yoma ndudni 'ina-nwoknihi tgo ' a , riwra kalura .
When Leti people say rkalura it means they eat raw fish while drinking palm cider . ||| Leti riwra rkalura de ita'ana i'in matmata pa ita talla temna tgo ' a .
Then the two of them went by the island of Moa and Rettiau Ruru said , `` No , not this one . '' ||| Noka rrora rmaiwa pa rlol Mo ' a noma Rettiau Ru'ru niwra : `` Aitia eda di . ''
Then they came to Lakor Island . Lakor was so afraid that it looked down so as a result the island of Lakor ( today ) has no mountains . ||| Noka rmaiwa Lakur de Lakru namta'ata pa nru ' u la yawa pede Lakur nakleha wo'ora-kawru ne rai mtatanni .
Then Rettiau Ruru said , `` Let us head north . '' ||| Noka Rettiau Ru'ru niwra : `` Itnehna Ra ' i . ''
Then they went north heading toward Damar island . ||| Noka rnehna Ra ' i wa pa rokur Dam pa .
They went to Damar and caused destruction there . ||| Rla'awa Dam pa dewade nweyat la Dam pa .
Then Rettiau Ruru said , `` That is enough , this is not my island . '' ||| Dewade Rettiau Ru'ru niwra : `` Hadewa , ma Lgona atia ' a hadi . ''
Then they headed south . ||| Noka rnehna Tranan wa .
They headed south and came ( to the island of Luang ) and Rettiau Ruru said , `` This is my own home . '' ||| Rnehna Tranan pa rmaiwa dewade Rettiau Ru'ru niwra : `` Anoh ' u eda de inahati .
Harbor here so I can get down and go see my grandmother . '' ||| Mupnial lia handi na na agerun pa ailia umkeka u'pu . ''
He came . ||| Nmaiwa .
When it was night he went and knocked on his grandmother 's door and she said , “ Who are you ? My grandchild died in the deep sea so do not come and try to deceive me . '' ||| Nmaiwa mel di wa pa nma lla ' a nkorkora upni hniarni noka upni niwra : “ He ' o ' a riy ' u nei , u'upu nmati nmolu olek la hletan lawan pa yana mmiai pa mpiutra-mpialka a ' u . ”
Then the grandson ( Rettiau Ru ’ ru ) said to her , “ Grandma , it is I . It is really true that I have come back , so you can open the door . '' ||| Noka upni ( Rettiau Ru ’ ru ) nakotla niwra : “ Upa a'ge hadi la , a ' inahati pa amwaiwa pa mhwari hniari . ”
Then the grandmother opened the door and let him in . ||| Noka upni nhari hniari pa lla'awa rialam pa .
Then he talked all about how he had been deceived in various ways . ||| Noka nwahaurnohora la upni niwra emkadi-emkadi rtota-rwudi a ' u pa emkadina-emkadina , nwahaurnohora .
Then he asked , “ Grandmother , where are they ? '' '' ||| Noka niwra : “ Erla meni upe ? ''
His grandmother said , “ They are getting married and they were gathering for the wedding party . '' ||| Noka upni niwra : “ Rrora rmehlim pa e rawoka mak kmehlima .
This very night they are gathering for it . ” ||| Mel di e rawoka- raleʼega ra . ''
Then Rettiau Ruru said , “ Grandmother , you take my ring and wear it and go to peel the wa'du , ( home made candle ) . '' ||| Noka Rettiau Ru ’ ru niwra : “ Upa mua'ala a kdie'lu di pa mukdielia pa modi mlia llaʼpa mtiot pa mpuikir wa'du . ''
Because a long time ago they did not have lamps , they just used something called wa'du . They made twisted wa'du . ||| Yoma ululu de edonna rnair lampu rhi ' to ' a wa'du , rhi ’ a wa'du wniewra .
They took ) kusambi seeds , castor oil plants and pounded that together then mixed it with kapok . Then it was pounded some more before twisting it all together around bamboo or wood then it was lit . ||| Kohapio ' o la , waʼdu riawna pa rtuʼtua pena rala peli rawah ' a pena rtu ’ tu rwewra la ora-au nanpena rtutnia .
They lit it and that ( the coil ) was peeled open to clean out the ashes . ||| Rtutnia pa riy rla ' demade rwikri-rwikria ha ' idni imanni .
So the old woman went to peel the wa'du in front of the girl ( younger brother 's wife about to marry older brother ) . ||| Pa happe ' a lla la'pa ntotpa nwikirwa ’ du imanni la patke ' di gaini .
The finger which the ring was on she used to peel the wa'du so the girl ( younger brother 's wife now marrying older brother ) would see the ring . ||| Totpena okarni maka kdieli hande la di nalla nwikir wa'du totpena patkeʼa namkeknana kdieli .
The old woman went . ||| Noka happe ' a lla'awa .
She went to keep the wa'du burning in front of the girl . ||| Lla la'pa natiak wa ’ du wnikarni la patke ' di gaini .
Then the girl saw the ring and thought , “ That is my ring . ” ” ||| Noka patke ' di namkeka nana kdieli dewade nwarora niwra : “ A kdie'lu hadile . ''
But she did not say anything , she only bowed her head . ||| Mere edon nakota hadoma na nruʼuwa .
Then the old woman peeled the wa ’ du . The girl saw the ring but only bowed her head . ||| Pena happe ’ a nwikri wa'du pena patke ' a namkek nana kdieli demade nruʼuwa .
This happened three times and she never said anything . Then the old woman came back . ||| Emkade mammain nek pa reʼeni wotelu ma ha noka edon nakota hadom pwali noka happeʼa nmaiwa .
The old woman came back to talk to her grandchild . When she arrived home he asked her , `` How did it go , grandmother ? '' ||| Happe ' a nmai pa nakotla upni dewade upni natiana : `` Emkameni up e ? ''
`` Hey , Grandson , I went and peeled the wa'du , but she just looked and bowed her head and said nothing . This happened three times and then I came home . '' ||| `` Up ei ailia lla ' pa awikir wa'du pa namkek toto ' a kdie'lu mere nru ' u , edonna nakot hadom pali na re'eni wotel noka amuaiwa .
`` She did not say anything . She has already forgotten you , '' ||| Edon nakot hadoma , up ei ha nhoratdoini olek o ' o wa .
`` because she is going to marry a wealthy man . '' ||| Yoma nora makre ' a-maktaru rmehlima-rmarya ' a pa nhoratdoini olek o ' a la pa yana mhoratrer neka wa . ''
'Then Rettiau Ruru said , `` I 'm going . '' ||| Noka Rettiau Ru'ru niwra : `` Upa ailia'awa .
`` Later you will see what will happen . '' ||| Ailia'awa na pena mukekrer nek la wa . ''
'Then he went and got on the sailfish and said to him , `` Now you can cut apart this island . '' ||| Noka nmaiwa pa nha'atla hrui wawannu na'nama nakotla hrui niwra : `` Dodo'on di de mtierieti noh dilla .
`` Destroy this island so that it is small and not proud . '' ||| Mpeyata-mpuaniawua noh di totpena noh di kukku ' a-kekke ' a loloha-tawtiawua , yana ntul kotni yana nwaw nanni .
`` Destroy this island ! '' ||| Mpeyata-mpuaniaw meman noh dilla . ''
'Then the sailfish said , `` If that is the way you want it , hold on tight ! '' ' ||| Noka hrui nakotla : `` Had emkade de mtiorer pitpitu .
`` Hold on tight so I can destroy the island . '' ||| Muawurrer pitpitga a ' u me totpena auweyat noh di . ''
'Then he held tightly to the sailfish 's back and the sailfish took off leaping into the air . ' ||| Dewade ntorer pitpitu hrui du'urnu wawannu na'nama nterwa .
'He shot off hitting Metutnu then Dona , Liakra , Hawna , Kpuri and Tiata . Luang shook violently ! ' ||| Nterwa dewade nalla Metutnu pa nalla Dona Liakra pa nalla Hawna , Kpuri Ttiata dewade Lgon di rruru .
'When it shook , all the people were so afraid that they all fled and went to other islands . ' ||| Rrur pa riy honnona ramta'at pa rawkikni-raplialin mommuou wa .
'Some went as far away as Seram and Papua , while others went to neighboring islands so that the island of Luang was deserted . ' ||| Rtikildoinia-rhaldoinia noh dilla pa makla'awa Herna , makla'awa Papu ' a , makla'awa noh paheli rai pa tatra re honnona pa noh di nahgali wa .
'The grandmother was also afraid . ' ||| Ne upni mana namta'at wal wia .
'She said , `` Oh no , this is my grandchild 's doing . He is going to ruin this island . I will go and find him . '' ||| Upni niwra : `` Idei u'upnu hihi'ini-yapyapni hadi , hota nweyat noh di , pa ailia wuahaka . ''
'Then his grandmother went down ( to the shore ) . ' ||| Noka upni nerunwa .
'She went to the beach and headed towards Gain Tutnu . Then the sailfish took off heading south and turned to face Tiata in order to break apart Tiata and then take on Nohinni . ' ||| Upni nerun pa la'awa Gain Tutnu dewade de hrui mana nter pa nnehn oleka Tranan pa nawalia pa niwra napallia Tia'ata totpena ntereti owa'ana Ttia'ata demade nal owa'an la Nohinni .
'The his grandmother was already at Gain Tutnu . ' ||| Dewade upni ed olek la Gain Tutnu .
The sailfish turned around to face Tiata . ( The grandmother ) was chewing betel nut and she pleaded to the sailfish for help . To stop him from destroying the island , she called to him ( singing this song ) : ||| Pa hrui niwra nti'ila pa napali Ttia'at wa dewade de nanaur pa nwak lili-maumuau la upa hrui pa nadia'du pa npollia upa hrui niwra :
My name is Lady Surriai , eh ||| Wawaw rara Surriai , awuaw raraoo Surriai ei ,
My name is Miss Lelriai , ne ' ||| Aweda rara Lelriai ,
My name is Lady Surriai , come to stand on the shore 's tip , eh , ||| Awuaw rara Surriai , ma upriri oo liltutnu ei ,
My name is Miss Lelriai , come right up to the point , ne ; ||| Aweda rara Lelriai , ma ukded la Ilgaini ne ,
I come right up to the edge of the sand to ask a favor of grandfather sailfish , eh , ||| Ма upriri lia Iltutnu , polpolu up oo srui ei ,
I come right up to the edge of the sand to ask a favor of the fish 's child , ne ; ||| Ma ukded la Ilgaini wuakwak a ’ na awalana ne ,
I ask of grandfather sailfish , do not destroy this island , eh , ||| Polpolu upa u srui , yana mpue oo yat noh ei ,
I ask of the moon 's child , do not crush the world , ne ; ||| Wuawak ana wlana ' a , yana mpuaniawu rai ne ,
Do not destroy this island , leave one end , eh , ||| Yana mpue yat noha , mkeitar tutnu oo id ei ,
Do not crush the world , leave a small sliver , ne ; ||| Yana mpuaniawu rai , maltary laini ida ne ,
Leave one end for me to stay , eh , ||| Mkeitar tutnu ida , tutnu id oo pa hgol ie ,
Leave one strip for me to live , ne ; ||| Maltaru laini ida , laini id pa yleta ne ,
My name is Lady Surriai , eh , ||| Wawaw rara Surriai ,
My name is Miss Lelriai , ne . ||| Aweda rara Lelriai ne ,
Then she took out a piece of betel nut from her mouth and threw it at the sailfish . Then both she and the sailfish turned to stone . She is there till this day still bowing her head . ||| Dewade naldoini knamni la wawni ralamni pa nnaklu la upa hrui wa dewade upa hrui nkeranwa happe ' a mana nkeran wal wia pa nwallia watu pa etla Gain Tutnu de nru ’ rer lia yawa .
The End . ||| Nhoruwa .
One year , there was a woman named Oktovina and her male siblings two grownup female children , one named Mina , one named Jakomina , and also a male named Godtlifa . ||| Anni ida , patke ’ a nanni Oktovina nora kakni muanke ’ a a ’ nani patkeʼa lawna woru , ri ’ ida nanni Mina , ri'ida nanni Jakomina , muankeʼa ida wali nanni Godtlifa .
This Godtlifa , was Oktovina 's youngest child and so they went to sea to look for octopus at Lailiawna . ||| Godtlifde , Oktovina a'nani gari pa la ' a rerunla rwahaka krita la Lailiawna , Tamta onni .
They went to Lailiawna then mother Oktovina and those two girls got down ( off the boat ) . ||| Rla'wa la ' a Lailiawna dewede inni Oktovina nora patke ' a rrora rerunla .
They got off at Lailiawna and the three of them searched for octopus . ||| Rerunla Lailiawna pa irwotelu rwahaka krita .
They told Godtlifa to pole the canoe , to go ahead of them to Tamta . ||| Ir'rhopna Godtlifa te'ena loi pa nalaullia Tamta .
The three of them were absorbed in the search for octopus then the tide also began to rise . ||| Irwotelu tepartarlia krita wnyahakni dewede metimana napra .
On that day the three of them had gotten many octopus , then the three of them threw their octopus on the land . ||| Lerdede irwotelu lernana krita liawanni dewede irwotelu rahlera krita la keranni .
They were in the process of walking when the current came with great strength heading for Upahrui . ||| Tepartarlia yala ' a dewede wauwau nmaide merannidi nokru Upahrui .
The three of them could not stand against the tide , then they threw away all the octopus which they had gotten . ||| Irwotelu ta'eni thannana wauwau dewede irhoplia la krita makra'enniana hanona .
The three of them swam for Upahrui but at that time mother Oktovina and Mina could not swim . ||| Irwotelu rnanlia Upahrui mera lerdede inni Oktovina nora Mina ta'eni rnanniana .
Then mother Oktovina and Mina sank into the sea but Jakomina was strong at swimming and got to the land at Upahrui . ||| Dewede inni Oktovina nora Mina teprerunla tah ' i mera Jakomina narurlia niani pa lernana Upahrui la keranni .
Then she took a good breath then climbed up to the top but she could not see them . ||| Noka na'ala aranni samomou dewede nha'atla tutuwawannu mera donna namkekanana ra .
The two of them had already drowned then Jakomina cried , and shouted because her mother Oktovina and Mina had already died . ||| Ir'rora rteprernu olekwa dewede Jakomina nkakurwa , nhawnu , yoma inni Oktovina nora Mina rmati olekwa .
That day not even one boat or canoe passed by , then the sun also set . ||| Lerdede puou , loi , idmana edonna rlereti , noma leramana nheriawa .
That day Godtlifa who had poled the canoe to go ahead of them , did not even know that his mother and Mina had already died . ||| Lerdede Godtlifa maka kte'ennana loi pa nalaullia , naplingeti inni nora Mina rmatia olekwa .
At sun down then one man named Timotius went to Tamta . ||| Lera ntuini dewede muanke ' a ida nanni Timotius la ' a Tamta .
He was in the process of poling his canoe then mother Oktovina 's hair became entangled around his pole . ||| Tepartarlia ntie'ena dewede inni Oktovina moratnu nmanaknyuinla te'ena .
Uncle Timotius was shocked , seeing this dead person so he yelled , “ Mother Oktovina . ” ||| Yei Timotius nheduma , namkeka rimatidi pa naknyaunanade inni Oktovina .
Then he motioned to the canoes that went to Tamta to come and get mother Oktovina and bring her to the village . ||| Dewede nkawi la loi makla ' a Tamta pa rmara'ala inni Oktovina pa rodia la ' a leta .
When they went to the village , those in the village we shocked . ||| Rla'wa letade , makdella leta rheduma .
The relatives were called , they cried for them to come get her , and bring mother Oktovina to the house . ||| Inni narni rpolu , rkakru pa rmarala , rodi inni Oktovina la roma nayanni .
The village chief ordered the people to go search for those three children , hopefully they had not already died . ||| Paprai nhopna limarora la ' a rwahaka kekenkua rwotelu , yanpa rmati olekwa .
They just kept searching so some went to Tamta , to Upahrui , and to Hawna . ||| Rwahakneka pa makla ' a Tamta , Upahrui , Hawna .
When those that went to Upahrui came close to the shore , Jakomina saw them then called them to come get her . ||| Makla ’ a Upahrui wakriani keranni , Jakomina namkeknana dewede npolu pa marala .
When they came and got her she was crying and crying , then they asked , `` Where are Godtlifa and Mina ? '' ||| Maralade nkakrunande , noka iratiana Godtlifa nora Mina erlameni ?
Then Jakomina said , `` Godtlifa is at Tamta , Mina and mother Oktovina could not swim so they already died . '' ||| Noka Jakomina nakotniwra Godtlifa etla Tamta , Mina nora inni Oktovina ta ’ eni rnanni pa irrora rmati olekwa .
Then those that went to get Jakomina said that they already found mother Oktovina . ||| Noka maklakala Jakomina rakotniwra inni Oktovina lernana olekwa .
Then they brought Jakomina and came to the village . ||| Noka irodia Jakomina pa maila ' a leta .
They came to the village , then they let Jakomina down then they returned again to search for Mina . ||| Rmai la leta dewede iralernu Jakomina noka rawalio wa'ana pa la rwahaka Mina .
They used a pole to push their boat toward Tamta . ||| Irte'ena pa rokru Tamta .
The people who went to Tamta already brought Godtlifa and the people who went to Hawna and Kpuri . ||| Limarora makla ’ a Tamta rodia oleka Godtlifa me limarora makla ’ a Hawna , Kpuri .
They were in the process of searching but they still had not found anything . ||| Tepartarlia wnyahaka mera ira edonna lernanetia .
Then they returned back to the village . ||| Noka ira walpia rmaiwia leta .
Early the next morning , they divided the people ; those to stay behind to bury the dead ( mother Oktovina ) , and those to go search for Mina . ||| Repardoin yawyawra ma ’ ata , rhakretia limarora makwarini pa rtamin mati ( inni Oktovina ) , makla ’ a rwahaka Mina .
They just kept searching till the sun set again . ||| Irwahaknekpa normar lera owa ’ ana .
Then those who were at Tamta came to the beach then they saw that ( Mina ) was rolling on the beach . ||| Dewede makdella Tamta irmai eniwawanu noka ramkekde ( Mina ) nanyewa la eniwawanu .
Then they got her and put her in the canoe to bring her to the village ( Luang ) . ||| Noka irala pa rkenia la loi rodia maila ' a leta ( Lgona ) .
When they came to the village , they made a coffin in order to quickly bury her because she already smelled . ||| Rmaila leta , irayapi lumni pleta pleta pa irla ’ a rtamni yoma nahuwu olekwa .
The relatives were extremely distressed by the tragedy on that day . ||| Hare matmiatni lerdede inni narni rsusdoinla .
What is more , Godtlifa and Jakomina cried day and night . ||| Yahoamde Godtlifa nora Jakomina rkakru lelera melmela .
Finished ||| Nhorwa .
Oh , our Lord , Lord God . ||| Ei , Matromlawnu ne , Orgahi Orha ' a , Uplerlawna Mempulwatnu .
You are in the highest , in Heaven . ||| O'etla gentutulu-watliolo'ona , Ilwio'itu-Darwonema , Ilyamou Watyatoha .
But now , I say your name , I pray to you , I worship you in order that you will listen and see us who are on this earth . ||| Mere dodo'ondi de , aghoi lia kotmu-awetla nanmu , apualu-wuak tiy O ' a , ghoi idma rrama lia'ara , totpena muheri tlinmu-mutatar matmu , mutlina-mutaili , mlina-muata reria ami lia noh kerna-rai kieran di wawannu .
I pray to you in order that you take care of and watch over us on this earth . ||| Apuolu-awuak tiy O ' a totpena mhilpai-muanatu , muhlili-mulakma , muyori-mudari ami lia riy ornoha-orrai di .
Take away disease and plagues from us . ||| Mudopardoini-muhaldoini nyeni-nyhena , rinni-kniahra maiya ami .
Take away evil from us . ||| Mitieridoini-muhaldoini yotyotni-yatyatni maiya ami .
Give us long life so that we will live a long time until we are old with white teeth and fallen teeth , then God will come and call our name . ||| Muala amormior mamni pa nawerna-naplahwa , ammorniana a tup mamni , amlawannana a liawan mamni , la'pa amlerla mto ' a-ppe ' a nihtuini-mortihamra , lli'ina ndahla-awu npo'pa nanpena Orgahi-Orha ' a mhoi lia mkot mamni-mpetla a nan mamni mtieman la a lim mamni miriyhamilla a dopal mamni .
We pray to you in order that you take care of our relatives on this earth of ours , so that on the day we meet each other we will praise your name . ||| Ampolu-ampak tiy O ' a totpena mhilpai-muanatga a ' in mamni nar mamni , a ' am mamni hyali miamni la ' a a noh mamni raiy miamni , totpena lera idpa am idma nwatroma-ntahnei id de , ama'uli mawedi reria o kotmu-o-nanmu .
Erase our sins . ||| Mho'doini-mhaidoini a do ' mamni-hal mamni .
This prayer of ours we are connecting to the one whose name is the one and only heir/son . ||| Polpuolu mamni-wakwak mamni di de amheli-mpapna he ' dilla a'namu Wutmeha-Laimieha .
True . ||| Totto ' a ( Amin ) .
Respected elders and relatives , those who are gathered around . ||| Ina-ama , Ina-nara , makle'lu-makdalwa .
At one time the Lord God created , formed , put together our ancestors Adam [ lit . gathered dustgathered red clay ] and Eve [ lit . one rib only mother-only rib ] . ||| La ' lera Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna Mempulwatnu Nakoki-nayapia , Nakoma-napala , Nhedruh ' a-ntaplihi it upni-tgarni Wuwtian wioka-Lai tian miera nora Ruh meh inni-Uh mueh riwni .
Then he took care of them with peace and blessings on every side . ||| Nhornioma Ntera-ndema la kalwiedni-paitiotni .
Adam and partner/pair ( Eve ) lived in paradise . ||| Wuwtian wioka-Lai-tian miera nora ulwualli-tnialwialli de rmori-rdarlia il wiyo'riwnu-gen wio'mara .
Then the devil was jealous/angry at our two ancestors who were living in blessedness . ||| La ' noma hegana amlawanni ralamni namehra la it upni-tgarni rrora rmori-rdarlia pripanni-fa'anni ralamni .
Then the devil turned his body into a snake ( lit . reptile red spying-snake yellow ) in order to bring deceit to Eve ( lit . one rib only mother-only rib ) . ||| Noma hegana nawiru-nawalia inonnila Tok mier wu ' u-Ni ' mar rahlu pa nodia nur siawortra-namsale ' u la Ruh meh inni-Uh mueh riwni .
Then he deceived Adam so that they received death which resulted even in being buried in the earth and becoming dust again . ||| Noma nwotra-le'niana Wuwtian wioka-Lay tian miera pede rlerla matmiati-molmuolu hoho ' a-tawtiawu la'pa ralumni rakietra la Up rar noha-Rar rayi nora kodni awnu-topni-tanni owa'ana .
Even though our ancestors were tempted like that , God did not stop taking care of Adam 's descendants ( Lit seminal fluid water-exchange ) . ||| La'pa it upni-tgarni yatotni-yarieini emkade ho'mana , Orgahi-Orha ' a edona Nolin lima-nwe'er-rorni la Wuw tian wioka-Lai tian miera kotnu-turnu gerni-wniaunu .
Time went on till Kain hit very hard Habel till he died ( lit . blood came out-turn into feces ) . ||| La'pa Kain nkaklia po ' a-liwra manga garni Habel pa nok rara-nwaltie'eni .
Then Habela 's sacrificed life ( death ) was a witness crying out to the Lord God who lives in heaven ( lit . One who owns all , the great grandfather sun the most precious jewel/stone who dwells at the sixth or seventh level on the pure mountain/land-set apart rock ) . ||| La'pa Habela aranni naprir niohora tniunu hniaranni-odawni la'pa natipu-natnian lia Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu makdenla Ilwo'itu-Darwionema , Ilyamou-Watyatoha .
Then the Lord God sent Kain away for good [ lit . completely washed out Kain 's footsteps . ||| Noma Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna Mempulwatnu Ndi'na Kain yeheni-lowa Kain hlorni .
But when Kain was about to leave then God put a sign on Kain 's forehead . ||| Mere la'pa Kain nwaktarlia pa lergotwa noma Uplerlawna nhonnia Kain reranni .
The book/Bible says that God does not forget the words/promise he has said/made . ||| Puka lirni enakota de Uplerlawna edona nhortaplinga lir mak ha nakota .
Long ago he said to Adam : `` Bear children and fill the earth . '' ||| Nomlerni de enakota la ' a Wuwtian wioka-Lai tian miera niwra : Mi'upa-mi ' a'na totpena mipenga noh di wawannu .
But when those people multiplied , then they did not have respect for God until it reached until Noah 's time . ||| Mere la'pa rimormiori re rpeh mutliawna-rlawan ketiaru , noma kleh ya'unna-yamta'ata la Uplerlawna-Mempulwatnu pa la'pa nte'ela Up Nuh tuwnu .
Then the Lord God split apart the heavens so rain fell down and stepped on the earth so the springs of water would flow . ||| Noma Orgahi-Orha ' a Uplerlawna ritie'era lyanti pa ger otna naktiowru me nha'apre'era noh marna pa ger ormata roplia riwriwu-hararna .
Then he caused people to reach to destruction . ||| Noma narieniande rimormiori rlerla kowlora-pah ' a meti .
But because of God 's own love therefore he took a boat to save Noh and his wife and children . ||| Mere Uplerlawna orgahani sniayanni pa Nala konkona-aupuali na nalewna Nuh nor hawni-a'nani .
The multitudes of people ( were not saved ) except God set apart those eight people to walk along the right path/path of righteousness . ||| Rimormioria riwnu-halli re enekneka Orgahi-Orha ' a ntawdioinia rimormiori re wo'awa pa rtikilrerlia yehtan miera me rhaparrerlia hlor wewnihi .
But even though it was like that people increased in number and multiplied . ||| Mere la'pa emkade ho'mana rimormiori rpeh mutliawna-rlawan keitiarwua .
Then they lacked respect for God 's words . ||| Noma kleh ya'unna-yamta'at la Uplerlawna lirNi-tunNu .
God himself used his hands to hold his law which was written on stone and give to Musa so in order that we can really see ( the truth ) but all the more greatly sin increased . ||| Uplerlawna orgahani Nal limni nantoreri lirNi-tunNu deulLu-tatarNi maka kahniorattarlia watu le ' u pa Nala la Musa pa totpena itamkek memna mere yeher to'ame do ' a-hala naitittarrerlia .
Perhaps God could not endure this any longer . ||| Matialo'onamde Uplerlawna takenia ntahanana .
Then he used people who are uncivilized ( lit . people who live all ears and hairy tongue ? ) to become prophets concerning ( the fact that ) the One and Only Son/Heir will descend down to this earth . ||| Noma Nnairia rimormioria makmori-kdarlia tlin tetema-nampulwullu pa rhi ' a makwohor ulu-ktatrulu la ' a Wutmueha-Lai mieha hota ntopur la maiya noh marna wawannu .
In Luke 's book it talks about the time that Jesus was born in the Betlahem stable . ||| La ' a Lukas pukni de e nwahaur nohora la lerni ha rtora Yesus la krahana Betlahem .
When we hear the words saying , `` rtora , '' its meaning is bear or give life/birth . ||| La'pa itatlina lira niwra : rtora , nnia'eratni de rayoria onde rmoria .
But in the traditional culture in the Luang language of our ancestors they say : The One and Only Son/Heir descends on the earth . ||| Mere la ' pa'etnu de nhi'inde yawala Lgona lir ina-ama riwra : Wutmeha-Lai mieha Ntopurla noh marna wawannu .
It is as if the Luang people do not know the words like this : just then a baby named Jesus was born . ||| Emaknekame Lgona ra'aplinga lir maka kiwra : na'nama e rtor papayi id de nwaw Yesus .
Because it is just like Luang people know that the one who was just born , was the true One-and Only Son/Heir of a king . ||| Yoma emaknekame Lgona e ratniohor de Yesus maka na'nama ha rayori de , Wutmueha-Laimieha e inhatte .
Why was that ? ||| Yoma la ' a hya ' a ?
We Luang people say this , because in the time of our ancestors the ancestor westerners came and put holes in our earth and opened our eyes , that-is they gave us Yesus ' name and they taught us how to read the book , they said this Jesus , he was born in Betlahem on an island in the far west . ||| Pede Lgona itakot emkadena , de onnila lerni upa-wlada rma rhu'ula ita tlinni-twer it matni , de rala Yesus nanNi me rwatut itla pniaki la puka ralamni de , riwra Yesus di , de rmor hya'dilla Betlahem la ' noh makden warta roo !
But long ago , when the earth was young/newly created , the boulders and rocks were breaking apart , in our ancestors words they would say : the chicken lays strongly its egg in the nest , and dogs are tamed from the chains . ||| Mere nomlerni , la noha nhera-rayi nwanni , illi npoka-watu npetu , de lir in-ama riwra : hiwi naro'wa pitga terannu la ' kuranni , me ahu nayamarlia diadallu .
We here in Luang ( Luang Sermata , Island swallow-Land dark , Rock mountain face Village north ? ) , we lived in darkness . But on every rock there was a banyan tree and a village already . ||| Itla maiye Lgona-Mdona , Nohlumni-Ray Mietma , Watga'illi-Let Ra ' leta , it mori-tdarlia melmellikalkalamni . Mere la ' a rima-rima illi-watnu de nu'nu mutu-natar leta er olekla wa .
Our history says that concerning us our Luang ancestors knew how to pray ( lit . bow to the sky and cry out to the sun and moon ) , in the praying house . ||| Tui nakota de la ' a itla Lgon di , de ratu rwatniarla lyanit marna pa rhoilia wunu-rtanlia lera , la roma polwunu-waklera .
That is what strengthens us in our position , so that we can also talk about the One-and Only Son 's affairs . ||| Hade edmaka karurnian itla it hnia'argeni , pa itakot nohor walia Wutmueha-Lai mieha ha lollola .
Come let us use the Luang language to talk about Christ Jesus ! ||| Miai pia tal it yawala Lgonni ta takot nohora Yesus Makamori-kalewan de !
Just like the prophet Mika 's chapter , `` One 's crying over Samaria and Yerusalem saying : All of you on earth listen . God who dwells in the highest will come and stand to war with you . '' ||| Emaknekam de Makwohorullu-ktatrulu Mika wniahaurnu yanullu me ntatra yatnianila Samaria me Yerusalem de niwra : Makden nohkerna wawannu honomi mitlina : Orgahi-Orga ' a makdenla tutullulolo'oni hota nma Ntutrer wial pia miora mihuri-wiwo'ora .
The third verse says that He will come down from glory . ||| Tniatar lirni re'eni wotellu de niwra e Nwatiauwua hititni-lomomarni pa Nernu .
When we Luang people had not yet received the words of the book/Bible , our ancestors of long ago said that when the ancestor westerners brought this book of the good news , they used the words : `` Jesus has been already born . '' ||| Lgona ita edon tlernana ma'ta puka lirni , de it upni-tgarni lirni meman la ululu genni , de upa-wlada rodia puka kot kalwieda-paitiot di , de e riwra e rayor oleka Yesus .
But our Luang language in the traditional language says : The One-and Only Son descends . ||| Mere it yawala Lgonni la wniohor lir maranni de niwra : Wutmueha-Lai mieha ma Ntopru .
When we say descent , it means that , it is like we are talking about descending in battle . ||| La'pa itaweta tniopru , ha nnia'eratni de , emolmolan neka me itiwra maktopru la aralma .
The meaning of 'He descends ' is just like a person who is up high and jumps down . ||| Ntopru nnia'eratni emakwalime ri'ida ndella heyanan pa nehtiar lia yawa .
The book/Bible 's words truly go along/back up our Luang language . ||| Puka lirni toto meman pa nod niohor it yawala Lgonni .
Our Luang language helps to make clear God 's secret/deep words in the book/Bible . ||| It yawalla Lgonni re'ela nwahainiana Uplerlawna lir yade'eni-yamoyanni la ' a puka ralamni .
Let us use our Luang language to look closely into the book/Bible , just as if we were breaking it open . ||| Itala it yawala Lgonni tatwakerkar wutlia puka ralamni de , emolmolan nekame po ' a wnieta .
It is in the book/Bible it says : The Majus or in Malay it says ahli bintang/astronot , the term in the Luang language is : those who do unusual things , in traditional language we say those who can discern the early morning stars . ||| Etla puka ralamni de eniwra : Majus onde lirmelai niwra ahli bintang/astronot , yawala Lgona niwra makodia ukru-rehera , wniohora niwra makatu kakwieta lotielu lipni-rarlimna-laini .
Then when those who discern the early morning stars went to ask Herodes , the one in charge of the kingdom they asked saying : `` Where is the child that was just born ? ' ||| Noma la'pa makatu kakwieta lotielu lipni-rarlimna laini rla ' pa ratiana Herodes , maktorna lodna-hairi ratiana riwra : `` Keke'en maka na'nama ha rayorniande etla me ?
We come and ask for you to point out the place for us to go ( to find Him ) . ' ||| Ama matian pa mtiut geni totpa amla ' a .
Because He is the one who will go along the right path/path of righteousness and He only is the one who has power over this large number of Yehudi people . ||| Yoma ot E edmaka ktikiltarlia yeh tan miera , me khapar rerlia hlor wewnihi ne E ' nanpena edmaka kodi plolli la Yehudi riwnu-halli ri !
Herodes said : `` I do not know about it ! ' ||| Herodes niwra : `` Age uplin niohora de !
But if He really exists , then you tell me in order that I can worship him . '' ||| Mere la'pa plola pa etla , de mikot a ' tiotpena arie ' e la guh idma-riama lia'arni . ''
King Herodes himself did not even know . ||| Raye Herodes nmeh ' a nekade naplinga .
But those who really knew the scriptures knew because in the book/Bible it talks about Mika 's words in the fifth chapter and first verse saying : Oh Betlahem Efrata area , people say that you are the smallest of the villages in Yehudi . ||| Mere makanina-kamat niohora puka lirni de e ratga yoma la ' puka ralamni de ed makakot nohora Mika lirni re'eni wolimni tniatarni yanullu niwra : Hei Betlaham Efrata yapatni , riy riwra o kuku ' u-keke ' u maiya Yehudi ri letni re .
But later coming from this your small village/area I will raise one who is very great to rule over Israil who came from this village from of old . ||| Mere hota nwatiau let ku'umu di pa A ' u ariana metam keranni idla pa nodi plolli la Israil makatenna ulga let dilla ululu plialiani .
When Herodes heard that he was afraid , because of the prophet 's words , and we also are also afraid because in our words from the very beginning even , we say the One-and Only Son/Heir of the king will descend to the earth just like he is searching for war with those who do not respect God 's Words . ||| Herodies natlina de namta'ata , yoma makwohor ulu-ktatrulu lirni , ne itmana tamta'at wali yoma it lirni la ululu meman mana , itiwria Wut mueha-Lai mieha nma Ntopru la noh marna , de emakwalime e nahak ya'arni la ri ' maka edon kamta'ata Uplerlawna Mempulwatnu lirNi-tunNu .
If we think about the words that we have read in the book/Bible , let us not pretend that we do not know about the thinking that the One-and Only Son/Heir will descend on the earth . ||| La'pa itwarora lira-tun muak ha tpaiknana la puka ralamni ri , de yana seslia pa tiwa plinu-plo ' nek itla wniarora-wnialiai la Wutmueha-Lai mieha Ntopur la noh kerande wawannu .
Because He knows that we here in Luang , are fighting . ||| Yoma Enatga de ita maiyi Lgon di , de tlerla yahuri-yawo'ora .
We say that this Luang is what carries traditional true law but yet we seize each other 's possessions so that later the result will be that will not prosper ( lit . our sprouts will not grow into wide leaves which push up for the sky and our roots will not be long and grow deep into the ground ) . ||| Itiwra Lgon di ed makodia deulu-tatra plola-mneha mere twaldionia de tamat mera-tawul kgaulu pa hota narieiniande it uhwanu mana edona napniarwutlia wirtawi wewerna makokarla lyanti me mur la ' a plalahwa maka kwahipnila noha uwarnu .
Why are we not thinking about/paying attention to the words in the book/Bible which say the One-and-Only Son/Heir will descend bringing true judgment ? He will descend because He knows that we have run away already from peace . ||| Edona twarornana lira puka ralamni niwra Wutmeha-Lai mieha Ntopur de nodia kalwieda-paitiota rhinlel tiutu-relan mahmara yoma Natga de itawlar hal oleka kalwiedni-paitiotni ?
Let us pay attention to ( the needs of ) these widows and orphans ( the destitute ) here in Luang . ||| Twer it matni la a'na riyi patiata Lgona ri .
Let us not wait until full tide before we go fishing ( let us not put off helping them ) . ||| Yan itwei pia meti nhapenga nanpena itna'aili .
What about the widows/poor ? ||| Ne emkameni la a'na riyi patiata ?
Nets are all over the island , traps ? are killing octopus and shellfish , how about the many Luang people 's cry to the one who cares for people , the Creator and Sustainer ? ||| Dari nwewar noha , towa namatia krita-watrora , emkameni la Lgon uhunu riwni polpuolu wakwakni la maktera-kdema , makohi-kara , makawilla-kayomtia .
Jesus came to bring peace so that we do not argue about harvesting the reef . ||| Yesus Nmai die nodia kalwiedni pa yan tahuri-tawo'or nohora meti haru .
People from West Luang say it is their reef , People from East Luang say it is their reef . ||| Mutu Mnoa riwa ir metni , Enwiawna riwra ir metni .
The ancestors already created a boundary , but the young people are learning to seize other possessions . ||| Upa-tgara rhi ' taru-ryaptarg oleka watu niohora autiatra mere tuwuari-laweru rwatutlia matmera wulkgaulu .
History says that Luang 's navel-and Mnietu 's stomach are the ones that bring refreshment to Luang ( lit . island of our mothers-land of our fathers ) . ||| Tui nakottarga de Lgona ohorni-Mniet apannu ed makodia rinni-woki maiye Lgona Nohinna-Ray amni di .
West Luang , when they agreed traditionally , said that Enwiawna Mnietu are the ones to do the rebuking , but where is it ? ||| Mutu Mnioa la'pa rwa'ilga maranni de Enwiawna Mnietu edmaka kpolliohora , mere etla me ?
When West Luang and East Luang want to make rules about the reef , it is Letupnu that must rebuke , but where is it ? ||| Mutu Mnoa rora Enwiawna riwa rwanatarla metkierna wawannu , de Letupnu edmaka kpolliohora , mere etla me ?
In Psalms chapter twenty-two , verse twenty-eight it says : Do not move a boundary marker from old land concerning which you do not know the discussion from your ancestors time . ||| La ' Amsal wniahaurni re'eni teramporu wehrani woru tatarni teramporu wehrani wo'awa eniwra : Yana mpuatitnia rira tiemni-liannu la ' a tan ululu maka ha muplin niohora wniahaurnu la upmu-tgarmu lerni .
The Lord Jesus Christ says : I am descending to the earth , you know about Me because you have searched for My place ; the inns were too full for me therefore you found Me in the goat and sheep stable . ||| Orgahi-Orha ' a Yesus Makamori-kalewna Niwra : Atiopurla nohkerna wawannu , de mimiat niohor A ' u yoma mpiata'wa a ge'nu , de lep mutmu-lakpona rpennian A ' u pede mliernan alia pip-diuma lowanikrahani .
Your knowledge and insight found me in my mother 's lap . ||| Lirmi-yatmi ukru-rehermi rtutnian alia a i'nu riwni wawannu .
They have placed me in the sheep and goat 's place . ||| Rariwa-rahai alia pipi-wawi geni tienni .
The one who is all powerful/kings ( lit . holds the octopus head and the flags top ) also , they have not yet seen me so later I will return and come to meet you Luang people , I will be like a thief at night which you do not know about ! ||| Maktorna krita o'tani me hairi lia wuwannu mana , edona rkil mia't ma ' u pa hota Auwali pia Amua teman ti makdena Lgona miy die , hota A ' g emolmolla makwuri-makgalla la mela plinniohora !
Luang people pay attention ! ||| Lgon twahniorta !
True Peace to you . ||| Plola/Amin Itkalwiedni .
